Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 1 
To Appear in:  Itiel E. Dror & Stevan Harnad (Eds) Cognition Distributed: How Cognitive Technology 
Extends Our Minds. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 
Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology 
 
Itiel E. Dror 
School of Psychology  
University of Southampton 
Southampton , United Kingdom SO171BJ 
  
Stevan Harnad 
Chaire de recherché de Canada 
Institut des sciences cognitives 
Université du Québec à Montréal 
Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C3P8  
& 
School of Electronics and Computer Science 
University of Southampton 
Southampton , United Kingdom SO171BJ 
 
ABSTRACT: "Cognizing" (e.g., thinking, understanding, and knowing) is a 
mental state. Systems without mental states, such as cognitive 
technology, can sometimes contribute to human cognition, but that does 
not make them cognizers. Cognizers can offload some of their cognitive 
functions 
onto 
cognitive 
technology, 
thereby 
extending 
their 
performance capacity beyond the limits of their own brain power. 
Language itself is a form of cognitive technology that allows cognizers to 
offload some of their cognitive functions onto the brains of other 
cognizers. Language also extends cognizers' individual and joint 
performance powers, distributing the load through interactive and 
collaborative cognition. Reading, writing, print, telecommunications and 
computing further extend cognizers' capacities. And now the web, with 
its network of cognizers, digital databases and software agents, all 
accessible anytime, anywhere, has become our “Cognitive Commons,” in 
which distributed cognizers and cognitive technology can interoperate 
globally with a speed, scope and degree of interactivity inconceivable 
through local individual cognition alone. And as with language, the 
cognitive tool par excellence, such technological changes are not merely 
instrumental and quantitative: they can have profound effects on how we 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 2 
think and encode information, on how we communicate with one 
another, on our mental states, and on our very nature.  
 
Introductory Overview: 
With the development and wide use of cognitive technologies (Dror, 2007; Dascal & 
Dror, 2005), questions arise as to their effects on their human users and society, as 
well as on their own scope and limits: Can cognitive technologies (i) increase 
cognitive capacities and thus enhance human efficiency? (ii) affect how people and 
society go about achieving their goals? (iii) highlight and transform how we view 
ourselves and our goals? (iv) modify how we cognize and thus change our mental 
states and nature? (v) give rise to new forms of cognition (such as distributed 
cognition) and mental states that are either distributed across or even embodied in 
cognitive technology? 
These issues are examined as follows: 
 (1) The notion of an "extended mind" -- with mental states (i.e., felt states) 
“distributed” beyond the narrow bounds of the individual brain – is not only as 
improbable as the notion that the US government can have a distributed 
migraine headache, but arbitrary. 
(2) "Cognition" -- if it is simply defined as the ability to do the kinds of things 
that cognizers like us can do, plus the underlying functional mechanisms for 
doing them -- can be arbitrarily defined to be as wide or as narrow as we like. 
(3) Vagueness about the nature, locus and scope of cognizing leads to a 
dissociation of “cognitive states” from mental states. However, their co-
occurrence had been our only basis for distinguishing cognitive performance 
capacity from other capacities and functionality (animate or inanimate, 
narrow or wide). 
(4) If cognitive states are indeed not mental states, it follows that "cognitive 
technology" is not just something used by cognizers, but a functional part of 
the cognitive states themselves, because the boundary between user and tool 
disappears, and cognitive states become merely instances of functional states 
in general. 
(5) We then do not need the terms "cognitive" and "distributed cognition" at 
all, and can just talk about relatively complex and wide or narrow functional 
states, leaving it a coincidence and mystery (at least at this stage) that every 
single case of what we used to call “cognitive” also happened to be mental. 
(6) A way to resolve this is to accept that only mental states are cognitive 
states, that cognition is only narrow, and that the only place it is "distributed" 
is within a single cognizer's brain. 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 3 
(7) The only kind of “technology” that might really turn out to be intrinsically 
cognitive, rather than just being a tool used by cognizers, would be a robot that 
could pass the Turing Test (TT) -- because such a TT-scale robot would almost 
certainly have mental states, and hence it would be a cognizer in its own right. 
(8) Whatever distributed activity was going on within the functional 
mechanism generating such a TT robot’s performance capacity would then 
indeed be a case of distributed cognition (exactly as the distributed activity 
within our own brains is distributed cognition) – even if not all the 
components of its generating mechanism were located inside the robot’s head. 
(9) The “cognitive technology” used by such a TT robot, however, would still 
not be part of its distributed cognitive (hence mental) state, just as it is not a 
part of ours. 
(10) Nor would a group of such TT robots, interacting and collaborating, be a 
case of distributed cognition; it would merely be a case of collaborative 
cognition among individual (narrow) TT-robot cognizers, just as it is in the 
case of a group of collaborating human cognizers. 
(11) Cognitive technology does, however, extend the scope and power of 
cognition, exactly as sensory and motor technology extends the scope and 
power of the bodily senses and movement. 
(12) Just as we can see further with telescopes, move faster with cars, and do 
more with laser microsurgery than we can do with just our unaided hands and 
heads, so we can think faster and further, and do more, with language, books, 
calculators, computers, the web, algorithms, software agents, plus whatever is 
in the heads of other cognizers. 
(13) Both sensorimotor technology and cognitive technology extend our 
bodies’ and brains’ performance capacities as well as giving us the feeling of 
being able to do more than just our bodies and brains alone can do. 
(14) Sensorimotor and cognitive technology can thus generate a perceptual 
change, rather like virtual reality (VR), making us feel a difference in our body 
image and causal power (perhaps not unlike what the physical metamorphosis 
from caterpillar to butterfly might feel like, as one sensed one’s newfound 
somatic capacity to fly). 
(15) This change in perceived body image is indeed a change in mental state; 
but although its distal inputs and outputs certainly extend wider than the body 
(as all sensory inputs and all motor outputs do), the functional mechanism of 
that altered mental state is still just proximal -- skin and in – exactly as when it 
is induced by VR technology. 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 4 
(16) Hence, although sensorimotor and cognitive technology can undeniably 
extend our bodies’ sensorimotor and cognitive performance powers in the 
outside world, only their sensorimotor input and output contact points with 
our bodies are part of our cognitive (= mental) state, not the parts that extend 
beyond. 
(17) Perhaps it could be otherwise too, as in the case of a hypothetical TT-
robot whose generating mechanism is indeed partly located outside its body: 
Maybe parts of our brain could be removed and still functionally integrated 
with the rest wirelessly, through telemetry or some other action at a distance: 
But that would just be a widened, spatially distributed body. 
(18) The resultant distributed cognitive state would still not be the same thing 
as considering a telescope, car, library or calculator as parts of a distributed 
cognitive state (for either a human or a TT robot): Those would still just be 
parts of the sensorimotor I/O to and from the cognizer’s body. 
(19) We are not aware of the generating mechanism underlying our cognitive 
capacity, however, only of its outcome: Hence retrieving a word from memory 
or retrieving a word via a Google search feels much the same to us. 
(20) Does the fact that cognizing is a conscious mental state, yet we are 
unconscious of its underlying functional mechanism, mean that the underlying 
functional mechanism could include Google, Wikipedia, software agents and 
other human cognizers’ heads after all? That question is left open for the 
reader.  
(21) The worldwide web, a distributed network of cognizers, digital databases 
and sofware agents, has become our “Cognitive Commons,” in which cognizers 
and cognitive technology can share cognizing anytime and anywhere, and 
interact globally with a speed, scope and degree of interactivity that yield 
distributed cognizing with performance powers inconceivable within the 
scope of individual cognition. 
(22) Such changes go beyond mere quantitative increase in efficiency and 
performance power. As we increase our use and reliance on cognitive 
technologies, they effect and modify how we cognize, how we do things and 
what we do. Just as motor technology extended our physical ability and 
modified our physical life, cognitive technology extends our cognitive ability 
and modifies our mental life. 
 
Part I: What Distributed Cognition Is Not. 
Meaning: Narrow and Wide. Philosophers, in wrestling with the problem of 
meaning (“Is meaning in the head or is it in the world?”) have sometimes resorted to 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 5 
saying that there are two kinds of meaning, “narrow” and “wide,” the former located 
between the ears and the latter distributed across the entire universe -- both the 
Newtonian universe of distant stars and the Platonic universe of the eternal truths 
of logic and mathematics. The wide meaning of “apple,” for example, includes not 
only whatever it is that I may have in mind when I think of or say “apple,” but also 
what apples really are, out there in the world.1  
That, however, is all metaphysics, and concerns the existence and “reality” of some 
elusive entity called “meaning.” The mission of cognitive science is more modest: 
Humans and other organisms have certain functional capacities, including 
metabolism, reproduction, and locomotion. It is clear that each of these capacities is 
“narrow,” even though it sometimes involves a local interaction between the 
organism and part of the world around it (be that other organisms or the inanimate 
world).  
Performance Capacity. Movement itself, inasmuch as it includes the movements of  
parts of the organism, and not just the whole of the organism, covers everything that 
we are able to do; and that, in turn, extends naturally to all of our cognitive 
capacities – what we are able to think, deduce, understand, etc. – encompassing also 
the internal mechanisms that generate those capacities. 
So far, that makes all of cognition narrow: skin and in. It is not that we do not (as in 
metabolism and reproduction) interact with objects (and skins) outside our own 
skin. Although usually it is not particularly illuminating to speak of eating and 
digestion as a dyadic function, “distributed” between predator and prey. 
Reproductive function is for the most part decidedly dyadic and to that extent 
distributed more widely than a single organism.2  
Distributed Perception? Gibson (1966), too, has stressed that even something as 
seemingly passive as seeing is in fact interactive, with the locomotory organism 
perceiving things in terms of their sensorimotor “affordances” – what our dynamic 
bodies are able to do with external things. Don’t look for the purely sensory 
property that all “chairs” share: their real invariant is that they afford “sittability 
upon” – a property that cannot even be defined without reference to the shape and 
motor capacity of our bodies as well as the shape of things in the external world. 
Does it follow from this that the perceptual state of perceiving something is a 
distributed state that includes the perceiving organism as well as the external object 
or event or action that is being perceived? And – to extend this question further – is 
the cognitive state of thinking or knowing about something a distributed state, 
                                                        
1 This is even more evident when it comes to what is meant by “superstrings” or “prime number.” 
2 In the case of sexual reproduction, ab ovo, and in the case of asexual reproduction, a posteriori, so to 
speak. Indeed, there is perhaps a lesson to be learned about cognitive function from the two forms of 
reproductive function, since both are “productive” of something beyond the narrow borders of the 
particular organism in question. 
 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 6 
consisting of the cognizing organism plus the external object or event or action (or 
property or state) that is being cognized (Clark & Chalmers 1998; Wilson 2004)? 
Let us defer reply until we consider a few more cases, noting only that this question 
about whether perception/cognition is just (i) internal and local or (ii) 
internal/external and distributed is similar to the question of whether meaning is 
narrow or wide. 
Physical States: Narrow and Wide: A trivial answer would be that every physical 
state is “distributed” in that nothing is ever causally isolated from everything else. 
So in singling out (“individuating”) any physical “state” we are individuating an 
arbitrary subset of the total state of the universe: This chair is not causally isolated 
from the ground it rests upon, nor the ground from the rest of the planet, spinning 
about the solar system, etc. By that token, all states are wide – as wide as the world, 
including oneself, sitting on the chair.  
But the fact that there is no such thing as an absolutely isolated local entity or state 
is not what we mean when we ask whether cognitive states are narrow or wide. 
Otherwise, the state of a toaster, toasting bread, is wide too, and includes not only 
the toaster and the bread, but also the events transpiring on faraway Alpha 
Centauri. 
But, leaving aside the physics and metaphysics of wide causality and action-at-a-
distance: what about just the toaster and the bread? Does the “state” of a toaster, 
toasting bread, include the bread, being toasted? It seems obvious that this 
distinction, too, is arbitrary, hence trivial: We can include the toaster in a distributed 
hybrid state and call that a state of the toaster, or a state of toasting. Or we can say 
that the toaster does what it does, and the bread gets done to it whatever is done to 
it, but we will consider their states as distinct, acting upon one another (more the 
toaster acting on the bread than vice versa, unless the toast catches fire) but not a 
joint, distributed state worth speaking of as such, in useful discussions of either 
toasters or bread, and their respective functional states and properties. 
Autonomous Systems.  But although there are no states or systems that are 
completely isolated causally, there are surely “things” – like chairs and bread and 
toasters -- that are sufficiently isolated to be called autonomous things. Some of 
these autonomous things will be (again, only relatively) static, like chairs and bread, 
and some relatively dynamic, like a toaster – if plugged in and functioning. Some of 
these autonomous things may also be parts of other, wider autonomous things. 
Toasters have functional parts that can do what they do on their own, in isolation 
from the toaster. A toaster, in turn, may be part of a more elaborate device that 
toasts as well as butters, fills and wraps your sandwich; or simply a component in a 
modular commercial kitchen. 
So in this approximate way, bracketing the issue of wide causality, we arrive at the 
notion of autonomous systems, like toasters, composed sometimes of components 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 7 
that are themselves autonomous systems. Let us call those subcomponents 
autonomous modules, and note that any autonomous system could in principle also 
be an autonomous module in one (or many) wider autonomous systems. 
But is a toaster really autonomous? Don’t we have to build it, plug it in to the 
electrical system, and then put in the bread, and set the level, etc.? Are the toaster 
and bread and ourselves just part of a still wider distributed system, the one with 
the real autonomy, while the toaster and the bread are merely “slave” systems, with 
no autonomy of their own? 
We cannot avoid extending our relentless questions to asking what we really mean 
by “autonomy”: Is anything really autonomous, apart from the universe itself, or God 
almighty? This is again the question of causal isolation, and maybe we can again 
finesse it by settling for commonsense approximations: A system is autonomous if it 
can do what it does “on its own.” It’s just that systems differ in what they can do on 
their own. A toaster is an autonomous system that can only toast bread -- and that, 
only if a person plugs it in, puts in the bread, presses the switch. A person is an 
autonomous system that can (among other things) plug in a toaster, put in bread, 
and press the switch. And so it goes. Both autonomy and functional capacity look 
modular, and superordinate autonomous systems may include the distributed 
modularity of many component autonomous systems. 
We can easily get lost in this mereological maze, so let us avoid the lure of “general 
system theory” and just note that, yes, there are quasi-autonomous things and 
quasi-autonomous states, and those things and states may themselves be 
distributed parts of other, wider quasi-autonomous things and states. That’s all 
indisputable even before we get to the question of cognizing and distributed 
cognition. But before we broach that question, we alas have to ask yet another basic 
question: What is cognition? 
Cognitive and Vegetative Function. To a first approximation, we have already 
answered this: cognition is whatever gives cognitive systems the capacity to do what 
they can do. It is the causal substrate of performance capacity. Cognitive systems 
(“cognizers”) include ourselves and perhaps other animals (and possibly also 
extraterrestrial creatures, if they exist).  Do they include anything more? Are living 
systems the only cognizers? Are cognizers necessarily local, or can they be 
distributed? And is the capacity underlying everything that we cognizers can do 
cognitive, or only the capacity underlying some of what we can do?    
One question at a time. Let us first agree that not everything a human being can do is 
cognitive. Breathing, for example, except in some special cases, is not cognitive; 
neither is balance, again, except in some special cases. What are the special cases? 
They are when we breathe or adjust our balance consciously. Otherwise, breathing 
and balance are unconscious and automatic – we might call them “vegetative” rather 
than cognitive functions. 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 8 
Consciousness. But surely consciousness itself cannot be the mark of cognition 
either, because although when we take conscious control of our breathing or our 
balance that is undoubtedly cognitive, we are not really conscious of how we control 
breathing or balance. If we suddenly feel we are suffocating or falling over, we 
“command” our lungs to breathe and our limbs to right themselves, but we are 
hardly conscious of how our commands are implemented. It is physiologists who 
must discover how we manage to do those things. 
And, by the same token, if we do something that we are more accustomed to calling 
cognitive, such as perceiving a chair, understanding the meaning of a word, or 
remembering the product of seven times nine, all of which we cognize consciously, 
we are nevertheless unconscious of how we manage to perceive a chair as a chair,3 
how we understand the meaning of, say “cognitive,” or even how we retrieve (from 
wherever we “stored” it decades ago) the product of seven and nine. 
Fear not, dear reader, we have not been forced into the clutches of the metaphysical 
problem of Free Will here. We simply need to make the observation that what 
makes some of our capacities cognitive rather than vegetative ones is that we are 
conscious while we are executing them, and it feels like we are causing them to be 
executed – not necessarily that we are conscious of how they get executed (Libet 
1985).  
But that’s not enough. We have an initial approximate criterion for what 
performance capacities count as cognitive: It is the ones we execute consciously, 
which just means that we normally have to be conscious while we are executing 
them (This criterion is actually flawed, but we will fix it later.) 
Is There Cognizing Without Consciousness? Now the second question: Are there 
any other cognitive systems besides ourselves and animals? We have already noted 
that not all of our performance capacities are cognitive: the cognitive ones are the 
ones we execute consciously (although we are not conscious of how they are 
executed by our brains). The question of whether systems other than animals like us 
cognize is hence related to the question of whether or not there can be cognizing 
without consciousness: It concerns which organisms are conscious, and whether 
nonconscious -- perhaps even nonliving -- systems, can be cognizers too. 
The “Other-Minds” Problem. Let us quickly agree (with Hume and Descartes) that 
there is absolutely no way for one to know for sure whether anyone (or anything) 
but oneself is conscious. (This is called the “other minds” problem, and it is 
insoluble.) Hence we already have a problem here, if consciousness is the mark of 
the cognitive. We can’t know for sure who or what is or isn’t conscious. But do 
things get even worse? Doomed to be left agnostic about whether anyone or 
anything else is conscious, are we even more agnostic, then, about whether 
nonconscious systems can cognize? 
                                                        
3 i.e., how to detect its Gibsonian “affordances.” 
 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 9 
What Is Alive? Here there may be useful lessons to be drawn from the problem of 
life: Very similar questions have been raised about what it is for a system to be alive. 
We used to think there had to be a “vital force.” Now we know better; life is just the 
state of certain dynamical systems, having certain structural and functional 
properties, including molecular ones. The properties of living systems are all 
objective and observable, so once it has been ascertained that those properties are 
indeed present, there is no vitalist homologue of the “other minds” problem to 
trouble us, about whether or not the system is really in a biotic state, i.e., “really 
alive.” The observable, objective properties of living systems exhaust all there is to 
being alive (other, perhaps, than the “other minds” problem itself, for those who 
hold that all living systems must be conscious!). 
Biotic States: Narrow and Wide? The same question of distributedness – “narrow” 
versus “wide” life – arises also with living things: We all know the case of the 
amoeba, which is an individual, autonomous, one-celled organism, definitely alive in 
its own right. But when individual amoebae find themselves together in a certain 
chemical gradient, they coalesce and become a further, superordinate, fungus-like 
organism called a slime-mold. This is “distributed” life, in the sense that it is wider 
than any of the individual amoebae (who nevertheless remain alive too), and 
encompasses the entire slime mold, which is then an autonomous, superordinate, 
living organism. 
Something like the slime mold was also probably the origin of all multicellular 
organisms, all the way up to ourselves: We are instances of “wide” life, distributed 
over all our individual living (though only minimally autonomous) cells.  
Distributed Life. So far, so good. But, can a group of organisms working and 
functioning as one, be an individual organism? What about a sports team or an army 
unit? Or a colony of ants or bees? Even more controversially, some have gone on to 
argue that an entire biological species may also be an individual organism -- a wider, 
superordinate organism, distributed over all its members, much the way the slime 
mold is a superordinate organism distributed over its individual modules, the 
amoebae (Hull 1976). 
And it can get even wider, some arguing that Earth itself is a superordinate 
organism, “Gaia,” distributed over the entire biosphere (Lovelock 2000). Perhaps 
some exobiologists will want to argue that if there is life elsewhere in the universe, 
then all instances of biotic systems are distributed subcomponents of yet another 
individual mega-organism. 
We will not settle the question of “distributed life” here one way or the other, except 
to note that (apart from the relatively coherent multi-cellular organisms 
“supervening” on individual living cells) the criteria for individuating wider and 
wider forms of life begin to look just as arbitrary as the extension of physical states 
(on the grounds that no physical sub-state is totally isolated causally) to the size of 
the entire universe. Nor is it clear any more what, if anything, is at stake when we 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 10 
can call many distributed things one superordinate thing at will, mixing and 
matching according to taste. We should try to avoid such a state of affairs with 
distributed cognition.  
The questions of distributed life and of distributed cognition, however, are not 
independent, because (to a first approximation) it is living organisms that cognize 
(those of them that do), and it is likewise living organisms that are conscious (those 
of them that are).  
Spatial and Causal Disjointness. Up to the level of continuous multi-cellular 
organisms, we can agree about what is and is not a living organism. Consensus and 
coherence collapse only when we move to the level of the species or Gaia, as both 
the spatial distance and the causal interactions among the component organisms get 
distributed more and more widely and loosely: Fungi are the biggest uncontestable 
organisms on the planet. Some of them can grow underground to a size of over 
2,000 acres and live more than 2,000 years. Their individual fruiting bodies, the 
mushrooms (that we mistake as being the whole organism), though remote from 
one another in space, are all continuously connected. 
What about a coral colony, or, better, an ant colony?  Is it such a stretch from the 
spatially continuous and tightly coupled causal interactions of the amoebae that 
constitute a slime mold to the only somewhat more spatially disjoint and less tightly 
coupled causal interactions of the ants that constitute a colony? Within multi-
cellular organisms there is action at a distance (for example, via chemical gradients) 
as well as coherent but distributed activity (as in a neural network). And we all 
know that “spatial continuity” breaks down at microscopic scales. 
Fortunately, in individuating organisms there are other criteria besides spatial and 
temporal continuity. There is DNA, which can help resolve (up to cloning) whether 
or not two bits are (or were) indeed parts of the same organism. But genetic 
relatedness is only relative, which is what allows some to argue that species are 
individuals and that Gaia is a mega-organism.  
Distributed Mental States? We can avoid having to wrestle with the metaphysical 
problem of individual identity in making our bets as to whether something is a case 
of individual life or just multiple life, interacting. Siamese twins offer a clue: Why are 
we ready to contemplate the possibility that Gaia, or an entire species, or an ant 
colony, might be one single, widely distributed, physically disjoint organism, yet we 
are not ready to consider that Siamese twins, no matter how tightly fused they are 
physically, are one single organism?  The example illustrates how tightly 
interconnected and fused the questions of distributed life and distributed cognition 
really are (at least in our minds): 
The reason we would never dream of saying that Siamese twins are one single 
distributed organism is that they have two different minds. And distinctness (or 
identity) of minds trumps all of our other intuitions and inclinations, insofar as 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 11 
individuating either organisms or cognizers is concerned. Suppose Siamese twins 
could share every last body part yet could still have two distinct minds: not as in the 
ambiguous case of multiple personality disorder, where the “minds” (if they are 
really different minds at all) come and go serially, like masks, but where they are 
always jointly present, and you can communicate with them, and they with one 
another, simultaneously, exactly as in the case of ordinary Siamese twins (except 
that both cannot speak at exactly the same time). We would still have profound 
difficulty seeing them as one and the same “organism” – or perhaps we should say 
that the notion of an individual “organism” would simply lose its meaning for us in 
such a situation: They would be one “biotic system,” in some technical sense, but 
two distinct “cognizers.”4   
Is this “animism” (which was probably always latent in the “vitalism” that has since 
been discredited by molecular and evolutionary biology), just in our minds? Should 
we be accepting objective, system-based functional inventories of what does or does 
not count as a distinct cognizer, as we do with what does or does not count as being 
alive? Or does our subjective sense have some privileged say in the matter? 
Mind-Reading. The very same mentalistic intuition that underlies how many 
cognizers we perceive within a single organism can cut the other way too: The 
reason most of us are not ready to see an ant colony, a species, a corporation, a 
government, a sports team, an army unit or Gaia as either an individual organism or 
a cognizer is that we do not perceive any of them as having a mind. We can, with a 
little effort, see a tree or a fungus, a coral, an amoeba or a slime mold as a living 
organism, like us, especially if biologists tell us it is so; but we would have great 
difficulty seeing any of them as cognizers – unless we are ready to see them as being 
conscious (having a mind).  
We do have natural “mind-reading” abilities and inclinations (Whiten 1991), as 
along with fertile imaginations. When we are children, and our animism is at its 
”widest,” we are ready to see a tree as watching or even waving at us, or to believe 
that it hurts the tree when we kick it.  Past a certain age, children also have a great 
deal of difficulty not believing that it hurts a dog, or another child, if they kick it.5 
We perceive other minds because we can (sometimes) detect the Gibsonian 
“affordances” (perhaps via our “mirror neurons”) of being in a mental state: We 
know what it’s like to have a mind, because we each have one. The rest is our 
“mirror neurons,” detecting when another mind is in a mental state like our own, 
because it is doing something like what we would be doing in that mental state. In 
other words, we mind-read through a combination of having a mind and perceiving 
its bodily performance correlates in others (Gallese & Goldman 1998). 
                                                        
4 In contrast a baby born with extra limbs will always be considered as a single organism, regardless 
of how many extra limbs it has, as long as it has just one cognizing mind. 
 
5 Although without moral training, that is not necessarily enough to prevent the child from kicking it! 
 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 12 
The "other minds" problem does not go away; our 'mind reading' is not based on 
flawless deductive reasoning. The logic that similar consequences must have similar 
causes (I have a mind and know its bodily outcome, therefore such bodily outcomes 
in others must be caused by a mind) gives raise to false positives and false negatives. 
Hence we are fallible mind-readers. Seeing the tree as having a mind is probably a 
false positive. Might seeing Gaia as not having a mind be a false negative? Perhaps. 
But let us be clear about exactly what we would be getting right or wrong, when we 
made a correct “hit” versus a false positive or negative: 
Living and Cognizing. If Gaia, or a species (e.g., the earth’s elephant population as a 
whole) did have a mind, that would mean, roughly speaking, that it was the kind of 
thing that was capable of having a headache (not necessarily having a head, just 
having a headache), say, a migraine. The migraine is just a stand-in, here, for our 
intuitions about what it is to have a mind at all. To have a mind is to be in a mental 
state, and a mental state is simply a felt state:  To have mind is to feel something – to 
feel anything at all (e.g., a migraine).6 
And make no mistake about it: you must have a mind – i.e. you must be in a mental 
state, you must be able to feel -- in order to have any inkling at all of what it means 
to have a mind! A toaster will not get that from a dictionary definition. Outside 
minds there is nothing but mindless (feelingless, insentient) functionality. 
The Migraine Test. The migraine is merely our stand-in for the capacity to feel 
anything at all -- in other words, for being conscious. We all know what it feels like 
to have a headache. All feelings are pretty much like that, mutatis mutandis, from 
what it feels like to perceive a chair, to what it feels like to understand the meaning 
of a word or to remember the product of seven and nine. Note that what is essential 
for having a mind is not having the performance capacity itself – being able to detect 
the presence of the chair, being able to define or reply correctly to the word, being 
able to retrieve “sixty-three ” -- nor is it essential to have an understanding of the 
underlying causal mechanism of that performance capacity (knowing how we 
manage to do it). The essential thing for having a mind is being able to feel what it is 
like to have and execute the capacity – or to feel anything at all (e.g., a migraine). 
This is the consciousness that accompanies cognizing (though without necessarily 
any consciousness of how the cognizing actually works). 
Suppose it was somehow true that Gaia (or the entire elephant species, or an ant 
colony) was indeed a superordinate living organism, distributed across everything 
in the earth’s biosphere (or across all elephants, or all the ants in a colony). And 
suppose the reason we wrongly thought Gaia was not an organism was that we 
couldn’t imagine such a distributed system as being capable of having a migraine (or 
any other mental state). We could of course have been wrong about that too: Maybe 
                                                        
6 Having a mind, being in a mental state, being conscious, being in a conscious state, feeling, being in a 
feeling state, feeling anything at all -- all of these are synonymous. 
 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 13 
Gaia could have a migraine. (Because of the other-minds problem, there is no way to 
be sure one way or the other.)  
But suppose we were right that Gaia has no mind yet wrong that Gaia is not a living 
organism. In that case, our mind-reading mirror-neurons would have been right – 
they detected no mind. But they would nevertheless have steered us into a false 
negative, because Gaia, though mindless, is nevertheless alive.  In contrast, the 
child’s mirror-neurons commit a false positive on the migraine test, wrongly 
inferring that a tree does have a mental state, though it does not, but the child is 
nevertheless right (though for the wrong reasons) that the tree is alive. In both 
cases, being an organism was conflated, animistically, with having a mind. This is an 
error; living and feeling are not necessarily the same thing. There can be living 
organisms that have no mental states and there can be nonliving systems that do 
have mental states. 
Cognitive States and Mental States. Can the same distinction be made, however, if 
we apply the same mind-reading criterion to being a cognizer, rather than to being a 
living organism? We (or rather, our mind-reading mirror neurons) insisted, in the 
case of the Siamese twins with only one body, that even if Biology were to tell us 
that they were one single organism, they would still be two distinct cognizers, if they 
had two distinct minds: They would not have one, shared mind, even though they 
did have one, shared body. And if they had a migraine, it would be two migraines, 
even if it was implemented in one and the same head -- just as when something is a 
“headache” for the US Congress, it is at most N distinct headaches in the heads of N 
distinct members of congress, with no further superordinate entity feeling an N+1st 
headache (or feeling anything at all). There is no such thing as a distributed 
migraine – or, rather, a migraine cannot be distributed more widely than one head. 
And as migraines go, so goes cognizing too -- and with it cognition: Cognition cannot 
be distributed more widely than a head -- not if a cognitive state is a mental state. 
Cognitive Technology: Tools R Us? Does this settle the question of distributed 
cognition, or does it beg it? The case for distributed cognition is based mostly on 
cognitive technology: the argument is that even something as simple as an external 
piece of paper with a phone number on it is a piece of cognitive technology -- a 
peripheral device on which data are stored. If the phone number were encoded 
inside one’s brain, as a memory, there would be no dispute at all about its being part 
of the (internally) distributed cognitive state of, say, knowing or finding that phone 
number. Why, then, would we no longer consider that same datum as part of that 
distributed cognitive state just because its locus happened to be outside the 
cognizer’s body? 
Moreover, once we realize that our cognitive states include data that are located on 
an external piece of paper, then it becomes apparent that they include far more than 
that -- widely distributed things, ranging from everything located in our libraries 
and on the Web, to every auxiliary device, process or datum that may enter into any 
cognizing or its outcome, extending also to everything located in the narrow heads 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 14 
of all other individual cognizers (Hollan et al. 2000). Whether we want to include in 
a cognitive state everything that can potentially enter into anyone’s cognizing or 
only what actually enters into someone’s cognizing, either way, on this extended 
view, cognition is looking exceedingly wide. 
The Extended Mind. This wide view of distributed cognition is also called the 
“extended mind hypothesis” (Clark & Chalmers 1998; Wilson 2004). It has some 
affinities with wide theories of meaning, in which apples themselves, or the truths 
about apples, are taken to be part of the distributed meaning of “apple,” which is 
thereby extended beyond what may be going on within the narrow confines of the 
head of any individual, local cognizer. The extended mind is also reminiscent of the 
notion of “wide” toaster-states (in which the bread is part of a distributed state of 
the toaster), thereby also inheriting the apparent arbitrariness of such state 
extensions. 
We must accordingly ask ourselves why we would want to contemplate such 
arbitrary extensions of what it is to have or to be a mind, hence to be a cognizer and 
to cognize? Why would it even cross our minds? The answer is again the (insoluble) 
other-minds problem: Since there is no way of knowing for sure whether any 
cognizer other than oneself has a mind, there is even less way of knowing whether 
or not there can be cognizing without a mind, or even of knowing what the actual 
geographic boundaries of a mind are.  
We know, objectively, what cognition does. Doing is performance capacity. Cognitive 
science is also beginning to make some progress in explaining the functional 
mechanism generating that performance capacity (i.e., how our brains do it). We 
also know that so far the only systems that our adult “mind-reading” capacities have 
tentatively identified as being cognizers have been living organisms like ourselves. 
Our confidence that we have detected an “other mind” increases the more the 
candidate resembles ourselves, both in its appearance and in its performance 
capacities. That is in fact the (narrow) meaning of “cognition”: the kinds of things 
that I and other living organisms can do, using our minds. 
But there are other candidates that also seem to be able to do some of the things 
that living organisms like us can do, and not just the vegetative things, but the things 
we have identified as cognitive, when performed by us. Computers and robots are 
not only doing more and more of what only living organisms like us used to be able 
to do, but even the functional mechanisms that biology and cognitive science are 
proposing to explain how organisms do it often turn out to draw on the same 
functional mechanisms that explain how computers and robots do it. (Indeed, the 
functional explanation often comes from the fact that we have programmed 
computers and designed robots to do what we do, and in so doing, we have also 
provided a potential explanation of how our own brains do it). So, if it walks and 
quacks like a duck, and even its internal mechanism is like that of a duck, it’s only 
natural to assume it’s some kind of duck too. 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 15 
The Turing Test. This is the rationale and the methodology behind the Turing Test 
(TT; Turing 1950; Epstein et al. 2008): If we can design a system that can do 
everything that we can do -- and do it so well that even our mind-reading mirror-
neurons perceive it as having a mind -- then we have no more (or less) reason to 
doubt that it has a mind that we have for doubting that other human beings have 
minds (again because of the other-minds problem). In addition, the TT-passing 
candidate – which has to be a robot, because a computer alone cannot have all of our 
sensorimotor capacities – will provide us with at least one explanation of the 
functional mechanism underlying our own cognitive capacity. 
Hence the question of narrow vs. wide cognition is also a question about what is and 
is not part of the functional mechanism of a TT-passing robot: What needs to be 
“inside” such a robot in order to pass the TT? Note that this is not the question of 
whether we need to pack all its functions inside its head, the way ours are packed 
inside our heads. It is conceivable that the mechanism of the TT robot could be more 
widely distributed: some of it inside and some of it outside its body, integrated 
wirelessly, perhaps, from some central location. The states consisting of the joint 
activity of the robot-internal and the robot-external components of the mechanism 
that give the robot the capacity to pass the TT would be indisputably distributed 
cognitive states.  
But those hypothetically distributed robot states (if they are possible at all) do not 
settle the question we are inquiring about here. Nor would they settle it even if it 
were somehow possible to breed people with parts of their brains physically located 
outside their bodies and their joint activity integrated through wireless telemetry or 
some such. Such a hypothetical distributed robot (or person) could even have a 
distributed migraine. But what we would really have then would be a robot (or 
person) with an extended (or distributed) body. The constituents of its mental states 
would all still be (distributed) within that one distributed body. Our brains, after all, 
are still parts of our bodies, even if they could be removed, all or in part, temporarily 
or permanently, the way our hearts have been, and somehow kept functionally 
integrated with our bodies wirelessly. 
This is all cog-sci-fi. But the point of the example is to show that this sort of 
hypothetical cognitive state – distributed across multiple parts of a robot’s 
functional mechanism (or even multiple parts of an organism’s brain) that happen 
to be widely separated in space but coordinated wirelessly (Dennett 1981) – does 
not address the question of whether or not cognitive technology is part of our 
cognitive state too. An affirmative answer to the question of whether, if the parts of 
my brain that control the left and right sides of my body could be moved out of my 
brain and two miles apart, while still being able to remotely coordinate my walking, 
does not address the question of whether cars or calculators are a part of my mind. 7 
                                                        
7 Please note that if cognitive technology is only a tool and not part of our mind and a cognizer itself, 
this does not imply that it does not have profound effects on how we cognize --more on this later. 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 16 
Software Agents. It is not just today’s (sub-TT) robots that appear to be doing some 
of the things we cognizers do: Software agents seem to be doing it too, including 
communities of distributed software agents, interacting among themselves, trawling 
the net, executing local as well as distributed computations on local and distributed 
data, and displaying -- not just individually but also collectively -- performance 
capacities that, in living organisms like ourselves, we would have taken to be the 
result of cognizing (Dror 2007).   
These autonomous devices – both hardware and software -- are, of course, like 
toasters. But they are “cognitive” toasters, in that they operate not on bread but on 
informational inputs, to generate, as output, performance that we would have called 
cognitive if we had been the ones doing it.  Particularly in the case of the joint activity 
of distributed software agents, autonomously crawling the web, it is obvious why 
the question of whether a datum is internal or external becomes arbitrary. The 
datum may be the input to one agent or the output of another, and the distributed 
cognitive system consists of all the agents and their inputs and outputs together 
anyway. It makes little sense, nor is it of much use, to try to say which is the bread 
and which is the toaster in such cases. But is what these systems are doing (whether 
they are local pieces of hardware or distributed digital data and the software agents 
programmed to process them) cognizing, or just something that is similar to what 
ordinarily requires cognizing to do? The question seems to be as undecidable as 
whether or not Gaia is really a living organism.  
 
Part II: What Distributed Cognition Is. 
Wide-Body Beings. In Part I we argued that inasmuch as cognition is mentation 
(i.e., insofar as cognizing is thinking), there can only be distributed cognitive states 
where there can be distributed mental states. Within the head there are narrowly 
distributed cognitive states, since neural states are presumably not all local and 
punctate. If the mechanism that generates mental states and bodily performance 
capacity (normally the brain) could be more widely distributed in space (beyond the 
head), and still be integrated somehow so as to generate coordinated mental states 
and bodily function, then that too would be widely distributed cognition, whether in 
a hypothetical TT-scale robot or a hypothetically re-engineered organism, but that 
would also be a widely distributed body. Distributed cognition would still not be 
wider than the body. 
Can there be distributed cognition beyond the bounds of the body and the brain? In 
particular, can external cognitive technology serve as a functional part of our 
cognitive states, rather than just serving as input to and output from them? 
Mental States Are Conscious States. Let us consider brain states, rather than just 
mental or cognitive states. We have agreed that not everything our bodies do is 
                                                                                                                                                                     
 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 17 
cognitive. Some of it, like breathing, balance, or temperature control is vegetative. 
So, too, are the brain states that implement those vegetative functions. We have also 
agreed that although cognizing is conscious, we are not conscious of how cognizing 
is implemented. When we recognize a chair, or understand a word, or retrieve the 
product of seven and nine from our memory, the outcome, a conscious experience, is 
delivered to us on a platter. We are not conscious of how we recognized the chair, 
understood the word, or retrieved “63”. Hence the brain states that implement those 
cognitive functions are not conscious either. Are unconscious brain states mental? 
Are Unconscious Brain States Mental?  The natural answer would seem to be: no. 
Unconscious states are unconscious states. The states of a toaster are unconscious 
and certainly not mental. Until further notice, “conscious states” is synonymous with 
“mental states.” The brain states implementing vegetative function are not mental 
either: Presumably a person in a chronic vegetative state is as unconscious as a 
toaster (although, because of the other-minds problem, we can never be sure about 
either the toaster or the comatose person). The only reason we want to call the 
brain states that occur while we are conscious mental states is that they occur while 
we are in a conscious state, and they physically implement that conscious state. (We 
are on the fuzzy boundary of the mind/body problem here.) But just as vegetative 
states such as the regulation of breathing, which occur unconsciously while we are 
conscious, are nevertheless not themselves mental, nor part of our mental state, 
why would we want to call the unconscious state that “delivers” our conscious 
mental state mental?  
When you say to yourself “what is seven times nine?” and then “sixty-three” pops 
up, you are certainly conscious of thinking “sixty-three.” So that’s definitely mental; 
and so is the brain state that corresponds to your thinking “sixty-three.” But what 
about the brain state that actually found and delivered the “sixty-three”? You are 
certainly not conscious of that, although you were just as conscious while your brain 
was finding and delivering “sixty-three” as while you were breathing, though you 
don’t feel either of those states. 
Neural vs Google Storage and Retrieval. Let us make the retrieval interval longer 
then, just to make the problem more vivid: You are trying to remember the name of 
a poet. You know he wrote “Tell me not in mournful numbers, life is but an endless 
dream” and his name is on the tip of your tongue, but you just can’t retrieve it. You 
go to sleep, and next morning “Henry Wadsworth Longfellow” immediately pops up. 
You were not even awake during the brain state that retrieved it. So what difference 
does it make if you recall it through an unconscious retrieval state in your brain, or 
by Googling it (again relying on a state in some remote computer and database of 
which you are not conscious)? Are they not both based on an unconscious, 
nonmental state, in the first case narrow and neural, inside your brain, in the second 
case wide and computational, distributed between your brain and a computer 
hundreds or thousands of miles away? 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 18 
Distributed Databases. And what about a modern child, who has never bothered to 
memorize the multiplication tables, as you did, because a computer is always at 
hand? The only way he ever retrieves 7 x 9 is to key it in, and read off the product. 
He blindly consults his computer when you blindly consult your memory: What’s 
the difference? Never mind computers: the poet’s name could be read out of a static 
book that indexes poems’ first lines. Or you could just ask somebody who knows to 
tell you who wrote those lines. What difference does it make if the database in 
which the datum is stored, outside your awareness, is in your brain, or on the shelf 
of a library, or in someone else’s brain?  
Offloading Brainwork. The beginning of cognitive technology was surely language, 
which allowed cognizers to “offload” a lot of brainwork onto other brains that could 
do it for you, and deliver you the results, and vice-versa (Cangelosi & Harnad 2001; 
Dascal 2004). Are our own neural states, plus Google states, plus book states, plus 
the neural states in the heads of other cognizers all parts of distributed cognitive 
states – and if so, whose cognitive states? I am presumably the cognizer of my 
narrow cognitive states, but who is the cognizer of the wide ones?  
Or are cognitive states just sui generis, rather than belonging to anyone in 
particular? Neural firings in brains, plus keystrokes on computers, bits coursing 
across fibre optic cables, remote disk activity, print in a library book, neural states in 
other people’s brains – all just parts of wide, distributed, disembodied cognitive 
states, taking place here, there, and everywhere: cognizing, with no cognizer?8 
At the very least, we need to pinpoint the cognizer of the distributed cognitive state. 
Let us say it is the user of the cognitive technology, and that what we are asking is 
whether the technology outside the body is part of or merely I/O to/from a narrow 
cognitive state inside his brain? 
Sensorimotor Technology and Augmented Reality. Let us start by considering a 
kindred kind of technology, perhaps not quite cognitive, only sensorimotor, with the 
corresponding states being sensorimotor states rather than fully cognitive ones: 
Sensorimotor technology probably began in our species’ prehistory with tools and 
weapons, which extended our performance capacities dramatically. Let us consider 
a relatively recent tool: 
If you look at a star through a telescope, is that a distributed sensorimotor state, 
consisting of your brain and retina plus the telescope (and perhaps also the star), in 
which your visual capacity is augmented by the telescope’s power of refraction? Or 
is it just input to your narrow, skin-and-in sensorimotor state – input augmented by 
the telescope? 
                                                        
8 (rather like a distributed life, with no organism living it; or a distributed migraine, with no one 
experiencing it)? Isn’t cognition with no cognizer cognizing it like a feeling with no feeler feeling it?) 
 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 19 
If you are driving a car, is that an extended sensorimotor state, in which your body 
is moving at speeds in excess of what it can manage alone, narrowly? The wider, 
distributed sensorimotor state might include the car and its locomotor capacity. Or 
is it just output from your narrow, skin-and-in sensorimotor state (in this case a 
slow movement of your foot on the pedal) – output augmented by the horse-power 
of our external vehicle?  
Another example would be operating a crane, and the extended power to reach and 
manipulate objects that are too far, big and heavy to be manipulated in your 
narrower sensorimotor state. Is this a widely augmented I, or just I/O to narrow old 
me? 
But before we dismiss too quickly the notion of a wider sensorimotor state, note 
that some of us have literally experienced a change in our felt body image when 
driving a large car: Our sense of our own width, pulling through a narrow squeeze, 
extends to the width of our car, not just our narrow body. This change in body image 
is not unlike the effect induced by distorting prisms, Virtual Reality, or even surgery, 
prosthetic limbs, and  neurological re-adaptation. Tadpoles mutating into frogs and 
caterpillars mutating into butterflies might be undergoing similar sensorimotor 
changes in their body images and powers because of real changes in their (narrow) 
bodies: Are technology-extended bodies all that different? 
The Advent of Language. The effects of cognitive technology can be similar to 
those of sensorimotor technology. Language evolved neurologically for speech and 
its interactive tempo. We can accelerate recorded speech technologically beyond the 
rate we can speak it, yet still understand it. Beyond a certain speed, speech becomes 
gibberish – yet we can read and understand written language at far faster speeds 
(probably because hearing is a more serial medium of processing and vision is more 
parallel).  
It is virtually certain that there was no specific neural adaptation for reading, which 
was a technological invention of less than 10,000 years ago. In contrast, the 
language areas of our brain were shaped genetically several hundred thousand 
years ago, altering our neural hardware and radically extending our cognitive 
powers.  If spoken language widened our cognitive powers biologically, didn’t 
reading and writing widen them technologically in much the same way? 
Language As Distributed Cognition? Is language itself a form of distributed 
cognition? How does the knowledge in other people’s heads, conveyed to us 
auditorily, differ from the knowledge in books, conveyed to us visually? Both allow 
us to access information without needing to gather it the hard way, through our own 
direct, time-consuming, risky and uncertain sensorimotor experience. Writing and 
speaking also allow us to offload our knowledge and memory outside our own 
narrow bodies, rather than having to store it all internally. Individual cognizers 
write books, but Wikipedia, for example, seems to be growing spontaneously 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 20 
according to an independent, collective agenda of its own, more like the joint 
activity of a colony of ants. 
Computers, distributed digital databases and automated algorithms have 
augmented both the speed and the computing power of our brains, and that 
newfound speed and power is capable of inducing changes in our mental self-image 
not unlike the ones that sensorimotor technology can induce in our body image: If 
being deprived of one’s spectacles or one’s automobile feels rather like the loss of 
eyes or limbs, being deprived of one’s computer or cell-phone feels like the loss of 
one’s intrinsic cognitive and communicative capacity. 
Interactive Cognition. Human discourse is certainly interactive cognition, indeed 
collaborative cognition, and the speed and distance at which we could speak, and 
understand our interlocutors, set biological limits on the rate and scope of that 
collaborative cognition, hundreds of thousands of years ago. The speed of verbal 
thought probably co-evolved with language and is probably of the same order of 
magnitude as the speed of oral speech. Although reading speed is much faster than 
listening speed, writing (and typing) speed is not as fast as speaking (and the turn-
around time of letter delivery is certainly slower than conversational speed). So in 
real-time interactions, at the speed of thought, we still prefer to talk rather than 
write.  
It is only recently that cognitive technology (in this case, email and texting) has 
accelerated the potential speed of written interactions in almost real-time to 
something closer to the speed of thought. Web-based threaded discussion lists, and 
especially their quote/commentary capability, not only accelerate this interaction 
still further – allowing individual cognizers to interact with the text itself in real time. 
They also increase the scope of this almost-real-time interaction among distributed 
minds and distributed texts; and global posting and immediate accessibility 
potentially make the collaboration almost instantaneous (Harnad 2004).  
If the human brain was biologically optimized for interactive cognition at speaking 
speed, and writing technology slowed down that interactive cycle (in exchange for 
the other benefits of the transmission and archiving of a written record) for 
thousands of years, then digital online technology has now once again accelerated 
the interaction to the speed of thought, increasing its power and productivity by 
orders of magnitude, and distributing it globally and instantaneously. It is this 
newfound interactivity (not passive radio, television or film) that is at last truly 
turning Gaia into McLuhan’s (1962) “global village.” 
Cognizers and Tools. So where does this leave the question of distributed 
cognition? It is still cognizers who cognize -- the tool-users, not the tools.9 Yet there 
                                                        
9 Did some of the ambiguity arise from the fact that we fell into the habit (perhaps because of funding 
agency contingencies) of overusing (for funding purposes) a rather vague and equivocal noun and 
adjective – “cognition” and “cognitive” – instead of a less impressive verb and gerund – “cognize” and 
“cognizing” – to ask these questions that are basically about thinking and knowing? Would we have 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 21 
is no doubt that cognitive technology has radically widened the scope of human 
cognizing10. Could “cognitive technology” be the brain’s way of off-loading some of 
its otherwise far greater encoding and processing burden? If so, then the worldwide 
web, a distributed network of cognizers, digital databases and software agents, has 
effectively become our “Cognitive Commons,” in which distributed cognizers and 
cognitive technology can interoperate globally with a speed, scope and degree of 
interactivity that generate cognitive performance powers that would be 
inconceivable within the scope of individual local cognition alone.  
Cognitive Technology and the Human Mind. Is cognitive technology limited to 
increasing the cognitive performance capacity of its users? No. We have argued that 
cognitive tools are not themselves cognizers, nor do they have -- or serve as 
distributed substrates of -- mental states. But their effects go well beyond making 
human cognition more efficient and productive. Just as noncognitive technology 
(cars, planes, machinery) transformed our somatic lives, so the offloading of brain 
function onto cognitive technology is now transforming our cerebral lives.  Physical 
technology altered the frequency, intensity, and manner of our muscle use, altering 
our muscular development (even introducing new ‘technological diseases’, such as 
carpal tunnel syndrome). Cognitive technology will do likewise, but instead of 
affecting our muscles it will affect our brain development, organization and 
capacities. Changing how we think, learn, and communicate, our cognitive tools are 
reshaping our minds. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     
been ready to say that a library was doing “distributed knowing,” or that it was part of a “thinking 
state” distributed across brains and book-shelves? Or that “collaborative cognizing” was any more 
“distributed” than collaborative thinking or knowing (or worrying)? 
 
10  Epigenetics is perhaps a biological precedent for this (Waddington 1942): Not every trait of an 
organism needs to be genetically encoded in its (“narrow”) DNA. If there are stable environmental 
influences that can be relied upon to “canalize” the expression of genes without having to be written 
into the blueprint, that takes a needless load off the narrow code, and even allows it to be more 
flexible toward wider environmental contingencies. (Perhaps the neural counterpart of Eprigenetics 
should be called “Epinoetics.”) 
 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 22 
 
 
References 
Cangelosi, A. and Harnad, S. (2001) The Adaptive Advantage of Symbolic Theft Over 
Sensorimotor Toil: Grounding Language in Perceptual Categories.  Evolution of 
Communication 4: 117-142. 
Clark, A. & Chalmers, DJ. (1998) The Extended Mind. Analysis 58(1): 7-19 
Dascal, M. 2004. Language as a cognitive technology. In B. Gorayska & J.L. Mey (eds.), 
Cognition and Technology: Co-existence, Convergence, and Evolution (pp. 37-62). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Dascal, M. & Dror, I. E.  (2005). The impact of cognitive technologies: Towards a 
pragmatic approach. Pragmatics & Cognition, 13 (3), 451-457.  
Dennett, D. (1981) Where am I? In D. Dennett, Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on 
Mind and Psychology (pp. 310-323). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Dror, I. E. (2007). Land mines and gold mines in cognitive technologies. In I. E. Dror 
(ed.), Cognitive Technologies and the Pragmatics of Cognition (pp1-7). Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Epstein, R, Roberts, G & Beber, G. (2008) (Eds) Parsing the Turing Test: Philosophical 
and Methodological Issues in the Quest for the Thinking Computer Springer  
Gallese, V & Goldman, A. (1998) Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-
reading. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2(12): 493-501 
Gibson, JJ. (1966) The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Greenwood 
Publishing Group 
Harnad, S. (2004) Back to the Oral Tradition Through Skywriting at the Speed of 
Thought. In: Salaun, J-M & Vendendorpe, C. (Eds.). Le défi de la publication sur le 
web: hyperlectures, cybertextes et méta-éditions. Presses de l'enssib.  
Harnad, S. and Dror, I. (2006) Distributed Cognition: Cognizing, Autonomy and the 
Turing Test. Pragmatics & Cognition, 14 (2), 209-123.  
Hollan, J, Hutchins, E & Kirsh D (2000) Distributed cognition: toward a new 
foundation for human-computer interaction research. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction 7(2): 174-1962  
Hull, DL (1976) Are Species Really Individuals? Systematic Zoology 25 (2): 174-191 

Offloading Cognition onto Cognitive Technology / Page 23 
Libet, B. 1985. Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role of conscious will in 
voluntary action.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8: 529-566. 
Lovelock, James (2000). Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. Oxford University Press 
McLuhan, M. (1962) The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man. 
University of Toronto Press 
Turing, A.M. (1950) Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind 49 433-460  
Waddington, CH. (1942), The epigenotype. Endeavour 1, 18–20. 
Whiten, A. (Ed.) (1991). Natural theories of mind: Evolution, development, and 
simulation of everyday mindreading. Oxford: Blackwell 
Wilson, R. A. (2004) Boundaries of the Mind: The Individual in the Fragile Sciences - 
Cognition. Cambridge University Press 
