IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
 
 
58
Performance Investigation of Virtual Private Networks 
with Different Bandwidth Allocations 
 
 Mahalakshmi Chidambara Natarajan1, Ramaswamy Muthiah
2 
and Alamelu Nachiappan
3  
 
1,2
Electrical Engineering, Annamalai University  
Annamalai Nagar – 608002, Tamil Nadu, India
 
 
3
Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Pondicherry Engineering College 
Puducherry – 605014, India
 
 
 
Abstract 
A Virtual Private Network (VPN) provides private network 
connections over a publicly accessible shared network. The 
effective allocation of bandwidth for VPNs assumes 
significance in the present scenario due to varied traffic. 
Each VPN endpoint specifies bounds on the total amount of 
traffic that it is likely to send or receive at any time. The 
network provider tailors the VPN so that there is sufficient 
bandwidth for any traffic matrix that is consistent with 
these bounds. The approach incorporates the use of Ad-hoc 
On demand Distance Vector (AODV) protocol, with a view 
to accomplish an enhancement in the performance of the 
mobile networks. The NS2 based simulation results are 
evaluated in terms of its metrics for different bandwidth 
allocations, besides analyzing its performance in the event 
of exigencies such as link failures. The results highlight the 
suitability of the proposed strategy in the context of real 
time applications. 
Keywords: AODV, Bandwidth Allocation, Performance 
indices, VPN 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Wireless utilities have become an essential part of 
communication networks. They are considered as an 
auxiliary approach to be used in regions where it is 
difficult 
to 
build 
a 
wired 
connection. 
The 
development is seen to progress at an astounding 
speed, with evidences of significant growth in the 
areas of mobile subscribers and terminals, mobile and 
wireless access networks, and mobile services and 
applications. 
 
Wireless networks are primarily used in improvised 
environments where communication can be rapidly 
established between the nodes without requiring any 
fixed infrastructure. These networks emerge in a 
spontaneous manner when a node is within the 
transmission range of one or more nodes. The 
topology of the network is fundamentally fluid at all 
times. The routing protocols therefore act as the 
binding force to ensure connectivity between the 
nodes. 
 
The 
inter-router 
protocols 
essentially 
have 
information about their neighboring routers. These 
routers perform the functions in a static manner to 
meet the needs of a link severing, balance the load 
and satisfy the quality of service requirements. The 
node neighborhood on the contrary, changes rapidly 
along with the link connectivity depending upon the 
wireless range and mobility of the network. 
Consequently, the routing information also needs to 
be precisely updated at a similar pace taking into 
account the present neighborhood information. Thus 
the accurate functioning of a wireless network is 
directly bound with the sincere and skilful execution 
of these routing protocols by the participating nodes.  
 
The review revolves on the current work involved 
with Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) as it is for the 
first time an attempt with VPN on similar lines. A 
distributed bandwidth guaranteed shortest path 
routing algorithm has been evolved in order to 
accomplish good performance [1]. A variable 
bandwidth allocation approach that uses time 
frequency slot assignment has been proposed to 
reduce energy consumption of a collaborative sensor 
network, with variation in node density at event rates 
[2]. A quantization algorithm that allows the best 
possible variance for a given bandwidth constraints 
has been presented [3].  A simple bandwidth 
management architecture that allows the network 
administrator to cater to the traffic generated in the 
sensor network has been developed [4]. A multicast 
routing protocol suitable for Wireless Sensor 
Network that ensures the tradeoff between optimality 
of the multicast tree and efficiency of the data 
delivery has been built [5]. A maximum throughput 
bandwidth 
allocation 
strategy 
suitable 
for 
multichannel wireless mesh network has been 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
 
 
59
formulated to achieve a good tradeoff between 
fairness and throughput [6]. A load sharing scheme 
among sensor nodes that takes into account their 
computation capabilities and networking conditions 
has been suggested [7]. 
A Virtual Private Network (VPN) is a logical 
network that perceives data transmission through 
dedicated wireless means. The essential requirement 
for a VPN is to ensure the desired bandwidth, which 
demands the network provider to guarantee the VPN 
users that a certain amount of bandwidth will be 
available to them at any time, unaffected by the 
traffic sent through the physical network by other 
users (who are not part of the VPN). It is explicitly 
possible only if the stipulated bandwidth is reserved 
for the VPN on the links of the physical network. It is 
a significant task, from the perspective of the network 
provider to satisfy the bandwidth allocations for a 
VPN, while minimizing the amount of network 
resources that are assigned to it. 
 
2. Problem Description 
 
A deterministic data transfer Ad hoc on - demand 
Distance Vector (AODV) protocol, suitable for large 
VPNs is suggested in this paper. It is designed to 
reserve bandwidth in the network and route the traffic 
between endpoints in order that the reserved 
bandwidth supports every valid traffic matrix.  It is 
proposed to build an algorithm that can result in 
significant capacity savings to the service provider, in 
such a way that the next better alternate path based 
on bandwidth allocation is chosen in the event of an 
exigency. 
The 
scheme 
is 
evaluated 
through 
performance indices that portray the efficiency of the 
topology.  
 
3. Proposed Scheme 
 
The scheme is designed so as to arrange a packet to 
traverse from the identified source to the desired 
destination. If a node does not have a valid route to a 
destination, it initiates a route discovery process by 
broadcasting a route request packet. This packet 
contains source and destination addresses along with 
a sequence number. The sequence numbers ensure 
that the routes are loop free and if the intermediate 
nodes reply to route requests, they reply with the 
latest information only. Each neighbor (if it is not 
aware of the destination) broadcasts this packet to its 
neighbors and this process is repeated till an 
intermediate node is reached that has recent route 
information or till it reaches the destination. 
A model of the VPN as seen in figure 1 is considered 
in 
this 
paper 
for 
specifying 
the 
bandwidth 
requirements of a VPN. The idea is to specify for 
each VPN endpoint e, the maximum total bandwidth 
b+(e) of traffic that e will send into the network at 
any time and the maximum total bandwidth b−(e) of 
traffic that e will ever receive from the network at 
any time. The network capacity reserved for the VPN 
must be sufficient for every possible traffic pattern 
that is consistent with the b+ and b− values. The 
model provides a convenient way for the customers 
to specify their bandwidth requirements, but makes 
the problem of efficient bandwidth reservation harder 
than in the traditional model where the customer has 
to specify pairwise demands for all VPN endpoints. 
 
 
  
             Figure 1. Network Topology 
         
It is imperative that VPN traffic is effectively routed 
through the physical network, more so on a need 
based approach. It is in this direction that a specific 
scheme viz. Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector 
(AODV) is contemplated to accomplish the task with 
a perceived routing phenomenon. It is a routing 
protocol that is preferred particularly for dynamic 
link conditions. Every node in the network is 
designed to maintain a routing table, which contains 
information 
about 
the 
route 
to 
a particular 
destination. Whenever a packet is to be sent by a 
node, it first checks with its routing table to 
determine whether a route to the destination is 
already available. If so, it uses that route to send the 
packets to the destination. If a route is not available 
or the previously entered route is inactivated, then the 
node initiates a route discovery process. A Route 
REQuest packet (RREQ) is broadcasted by the node. 
Every node that receives the RREQ packet first 
checks if it is the destination for that packet and if so, 
it sends back a Route Reply packet (RREP). If it is 
not the destination, then it checks with its routing 
table to determine if it has got a route to the 
destination. If not, it relays the RREQ packet by 
broadcasting it to its neighbors. If its routing table 
does contain an entry to the destination, then the next 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
 
 
step is the comparison of the ‘Destination Sequence’ 
number in its routing table to that present in the 
RREQ packet. This Destination Sequence number is 
the sequence number of the last sent packet from the 
destination to the source. If the destination sequence 
number present in the routing table is lesser than or 
equal to the one contained in the RREQ packet, then 
the node relays the request further to its neighbors. If 
the number in the routing table is higher than the 
number in the packet, it denotes that the route is a 
‘fresh route’ and packets can be sent through this 
route. This intermediate node then sends a RREP 
packet to the node through which it received the 
RREQ packet. The RREP packet gets relayed back to 
the source through the reverse route. The source node 
then updates its routing table and sends its packet 
through this route. During the operation, if any node 
identifies a link failure it sends a Route ERRor packet 
(RERR) to all other nodes that uses this link for their 
communication to other nodes. 
 
The minimum amount of bandwidth that must be 
reserved for the VPN on each of the links of the 
physical network is uniquely determined once the 
routing is specified. The challenge is to compute a 
good routing that minimizes the total amount of 
necessary bandwidth reservations. Therefore a 
protocol based approach suitable for multipath 
routings is adopted with a view to facilitate 
undeterred data transfer between the source and 
destination.  
 
The bandwidth reserved for the VPN endpoint e Є E 
is denoted by xe.  The philosophy is to find a valid 
reservation according to bandwidth allocation. The 
validity of a reservation depends on  
 the 
routing. It is important to distinguish   several routing 
paradigms that can be used to transport VPN traffic 
through the physical network. With multi-path 
routing, every pair (u, v) is assigned a collection of 
paths from u to v together with a specification of 
which fraction of the traffic from u to v should be 
sent along each of these paths.  For every pair (u, v) 
of distinct nodes in Q, the traffic from u to v can be 
split arbitrarily among several paths.  A bandwidth 
reservation x is valid if and only if it holds for every 
valid traffic matrix D and for every link e Є E that 
 
∑
∈
≤
Q
v
u
e
v
u
v
u
x
f
d
,
,
, .
          _______________ (1) 
The term   
 in equation (1) expresses 
the amount of traffic that is routed through e when 
the current traffic matrix is D. 
∑
∈Q
v
u
v
u
v
u
f
d
,
,
, .
However, with VPNs attempting to be wireless in 
their configuration it is the ardent desire to explore 
the performance with the role of AODV based 
strategy in the mission of transfer of information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Flow Chart for Bandwidth Allocation 
 
4. Simulation Results 
 
The VPN is a 50-node random topology simulated 
using Network Simulator (NS2). The scheme 
envisages data transfer between a wireless source and 
destination. The first stage of the investigation is to 
allocate the baseline bandwidth restrictions in the 
three assumed routes as 2.1*106, 1.8*106, and 
1.9*106. The wireless nodes are configured to 
generate streams of traffic through a principle of 
fusing. A data message of size 512 bytes is to be 
transmitted. A comprehensive set of measurements of 
packets received, Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR), 
packet loss, routing delay and the energy expended 
through each of the available three paths are 
computed. Each reading is repeated a minimum of 
five times and the mean values of these samples are 
tabulated in Table 1. 
 
It is observed that the path with minimum bandwidth 
enjoys the superior performance, in successfully 
Start 
Construct the model of a network  
Apply the proposed algorithm and 
allocate bandwidth according to 
available resources
Initialize data transfer between a 
chosen source and destination nodes
Compute performance indices 
Choose the lowest bandwidth 
Initiate packet loss 
Apply the congestion algorithm and 
recompute the performance indices 
60
Stop 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
 
 
61
transferring the most number of packets, with 
minimum loss and delay. It incurs minimum 
expenditure of energy besides offering the highest 
PDR. The other paths with the subsequent higher 
bandwidths accomplish their relative degrees of 
performance in accordance with the design of the 
algorithm. 
Table 1. Performance Indices 
             
Path 
Band width 
* 10 6
Packets 
Received 
PDR 
Routing 
Delay 
Energy 
Consumed 
* 10 3
Packet 
Loss 
1 
2.1 
362 
27 
1.7 
5.5 
3.8 
2 
1.8 
385 
48 
0.75 
4.6 
2.15 
3 
1.9 
370 
38 
1.05 
5 
2.5 
            
The results seen through figures 3 and 4 are evaluated 
through the same AODV protocol based approach 
and displayed through bar charts, when data are 
allowed to be transmitted between the same source 
and destination. The analysis serves to establish that 
the algorithm is consistent in its mission and reveals 
that the protocol is viable for large scale 
transmission. 
 
The response of the network, with an increase in the 
number of packets transferred is investigated and 
seen from figure 3 that the minimum bandwidth path 
offers the highest increase in PDR with increase in 
the size of the packets contributes to enhance the 
energy  efficiency and foster the cause of extending  
the lifetime of the network.  The remaining two 
transitory paths do realize an increase in the PDR of 
relatively lower magnitudes. 
 
 
Figure 3. Packet Delivery Ratio vs Packet Size 
 
The proposed scheme  for an increase in the number 
of transmitted packets suffers from a loss of packets 
through transmission observed from figure 4. It is 
evident that a minimum bandwidth path retrogades 
the minimum loss while the other two hazzle with 
relatively higher losses. 
 
 
Figure 4. Packet loss vs Packet Size 
             
The NS2 graphs obtained 
for 
the 
different 
performance indices in the path with the minimum 
bandwidth is displayed in figures 5 through 10. 
Figure 5 shows the usage of bandwidth with time in 
the chosen path. 
 
 
Figure 5. Bandwidth vs Time 
 
The variation of  number of packets received, PDR, 
energy consumed to accord data transmission, with 
respect to time are seen in figures 6, 7 and 8 
respectively. The linear increase explains the 
suitability of the algorithm to handle varied traffic 
and cater to increases in accordance with the needs. 
 
 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
 
 
62
Figure 6. Packets Received vs Time 
 
 
Figure 7. Packet Delivery Ratio vs Time 
 
 
Figure 8. Energy Consumed vs Time 
 
The routing delay of the nodes in the network when it 
encompasses data transmission is displayed in figure 
9. It appears to be initially high for reasons of start 
up, but stabilizes thereafter and remains reasonably 
low throughout the linear increase in the packets 
transferred.  
 
   
 
Figure 9. Routing Delay vs Time 
 
The loss of packets increases with the increase in the 
number of packets transmitted as observed from 
figure 10. However, it is worthy to note that the loss 
is relatively low in this path when compared to other 
two paths as evident from Table 1. 
 
 
               Figure 10. Packet Loss vs Time 
 
In the event of the occurance of a link failure in the 
minimum bandwidth path, the network boils down to 
a two path topology. It is ensured that thereafter the 
performance 
is 
superior 
in 
the 
next 
minimumbandwidth path. The figures 11 and 12 
relate the number of packets received and PDR to 
time to validate the design of the algorithm. 
 
 
Figure 11. Packets received for Alternate Paths 
 
 
     
Figure 12. PDR for Alternate Paths 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
 
 
63
The AODV algorithm that can be applied to both 
symmetric and asymmetric bandwidth requirements 
has been designed to offer multipath routing and 
minimise the total cost of bandwidth reservation. It 
has been coined to handle natural constraints and 
inherit abilities to accordingly rearrange the topology 
to continue the process of data transmission. The 
feature that the network fuses in tune with the 
available resources has revealed its efficacy.   
 
A bandwidth allocation scheme suitable for Virtual 
Private Network that enables wireless transmission 
has been developed. Its performance has been 
evaluated through simulation and the metrics 
computed. It has been constructed to extract the 
improved performance with minimum delay, packet 
loss and energy consumption. The results have 
brought out that the scheme has contributed to a 
reliable data transfer procedure that will considerably 
increase the life time of the network. The graphs have 
been projected to realize the efficiency of the new 
algorithm and its suitability for present day 
applications in real time networks. The fact that the 
proposed approach facilitates the best performance in 
the minimum bandwidth path will go a long way in 
ensuring optimal use of bandwidth in the present 
busy traffic scenario.   
 
Acknowledgment 
 
The authors thank the authorities of Annamalai 
University for providing the necessary facilities in 
order to accomplish this piece of work. 
 
References 
[1] 
Ziming Zeng and Yanyuan Zeng, “An Efficient 
Scheme 
for 
Solving 
Bandwidth 
Guaranteed 
Scheduling and Shortest path Routing Problem in 
Wireless Mesh Networks”, IJCSNS International 
Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, 
VOL.7 No.12, December 2007. 
 
[2] 
Juan A. Sanchez, Pedro M. Ruiz, Jennifer Liu, and 
Ivan 
Stojmenovic, 
”Bandwidth-Efficient 
Geographic Multicast Routing Protocol for Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol.7, 
No.5, May 2007, pp.627-636. 
 
[3] 
Jian Tang, Guoliang Xue, and Weiyi Zhang,” 
Maximum 
Throughput 
and 
Fair 
Bandwidth 
Allocation 
in 
Multi-Channel 
Wireless 
Mesh 
Networks”, INFOCOM 2006, pp.1-10. 
 
[4] 
SeongHwan Cho and Kee-Eung Kim,”Variable 
Bandwidth Allocation Scheme for Energy Efficient 
Wireless Sensor Networks”, ICC 2005, Vol.5, 
pp.3314-3318. 
 
[5] 
Alejandro Ribeiro and Georgios B. Giannakis, 
“Bandwidth-Constrained Distributed Estimation for 
Wireless Sensor Networks – Part I: Gaussian Case”, 
IEEE transactions on Signal Processing, April 2006, 
Vol.54, Issue 3, pp. 1131-1143. 
 
[6] 
Elisa Rondini , Stephen Hailes and Li Li,” Load 
Sharing 
and 
Bandwidth 
Control 
in 
Mobile 
P2PWireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE International 
conference 
on 
Persive 
Computing 
and 
Communications( PERCOM),2008, pp. 468-473. 
 
[7] 
Bret Hull, Kyle Jamieson, and Hari Balakrishnan, 
“Bandwidth Management in Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, in Proceedings of the first International 
Conference 
on 
Embedded 
networked 
sensor 
systems, April 8, 2003, pp.306-307. 
 
[8] 
lpar Juttner, Istvan Szabo and Aron Szentesi,  ” On 
Bandwidth Efficiency of the Hose Resource 
Management Model in Virtual Private Networks”, 
IEEE Proceedings of the INFOCOM 2003, Vol. 1, 
pp. 386 – 395. 
 
[9] 
Monia Ghobadi, Sudhakar Ganti, Gholamali C. 
Shoja, “Hierarchical Provisioning Algorithm for 
Virtual Private Networks Using the Hose Model”, 
IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 proceedings. 
 
[10] 
Monia Ghobadi, Sudhakar Ganti, Gholamali C. 
Shoja, ”Resource Optimization to Provision a 
Virtual Private Network Using the Hose Model”, 
ICC 2007 proceedings. 
 
[11] 
Rahul Garg and Huzur Saran,” Fair Bandwidth 
Sharing Among Virtual Networks: A Capacity 
Resizing Approach”, INFOCOM 2000, Vol. 1, 
pp.255-264. 
 
[12] 
M. Shimamura, “Performance Evaluation of Hose 
Bandwidth Allocation Method using Feedback 
Control and Class-Based Queueing for VPNs”, 
IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Communications, 
Computers and Signal Processing, 2005, pp. 241-
244. 
 
[13] 
Kumudu 
S. 
Munasinghe 
and 
Seyed 
A. 
Shahrestani,”Wireless VPNs: An Evaluation of QoS 
Metrics and Measures”, International Conferrence 
on Mobile Business, 2005, pp.616-622. 
 
[14] 
Muhammad Khalid Bashir, Imtiaz Ahmed and 
Ahsan Raza,” A Wireless VPN for a Textile Group 
Using Wireless Access Points”,  Journal of 
Agriculture and Social sciences, 2005, pp. 66-68. 
 
[15] 
Monis Akhlaq, M Noman Jafri, Muzammil A Khan, 
and Baber Aslam,” Addressing Security Concerns 
of Data Exchange in AODV Protocol”, World 
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 
2006. 
 
 
