Mineral Processing and Metal Extraction on the Lunar 
Surface - Challenges and Opportunities 
Matthew G. Shaw1*, Matthew S. Humbert1, Geoffrey A. Brooks1, Akbar Rhamdhani1, Alan R. 
Duffy2, and Mark I. Pownceby3 
     1 Fluid and Process Dynamics Group, FSET, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, 
VIC 3122, Australia 
     2 Centre for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology, 
Hawthorn, VIC 3122, Australia 
     3 CSIRO Mineral Resources, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia 
     * Corresponding author: mgshaw@swin.edu.au 
 
Abstract: The lunar surface is extremely harsh and current mineral processing and metal 
extraction technologies are not adequately equipped to address this environment. In this paper we 
review the metals available for extraction and conditions at the lunar surface, and analyse the challenges 
associated with comminution, beneficiation, and metal extraction operations. The potential beneficial 
effects of the natural lunar conditions are also evaluated. This investigation concludes that process plant 
design on the lunar surface will favour lightweight, schematically simple flow sheets that enable 
automation, and that utilise the local environment wherever possible. The elimination of traditional 
comminution and beneficiation stages and their replacement with basic classification could be 
economically favourable. The most promising metal reduction pathways are identified as molten 
regolith electrolysis, and vacuum thermal dissociation, other processes with merit are hydrogen 
reduction, carbothermal reduction, and solid electrolysis. Finally, it is identified that a significant 
research effort in all areas of astrometallurgy will be required before industrial-sized extra-terrestrial 
mineral processing and metal extraction operations will be viable. 
Keywords: Astrometallurgy, Mineral Processing, In-Situ Resource Utilisation, Lunar ISRU, 
Comminution, Beneficiation, Metal Production 
 
 

Introduction 
The development of metallurgical processes for use in space, termed astrometallurgy, is a field 
of research that will be critical for prolonged human and robotic presence in cislunar space and beyond. 
The processing and use of in situ resources, or space resource utilisation (SRU), is intended to enable 
the economic industrialisation of space, and specifically in the case of the current work, the Moon. With 
a prolonged presence on the Moon will come the need for more substantial and complex mineral 
extraction and metal production operations.  
Mineral processing or ‘beneficiation’, as a practice, is predicated on the idea of separating 
valuable minerals from gangue (waste) based on their different physical and chemical characteristics. 
The extent to which those characteristics can be exploited is heavily influenced by the surrounding 
conditions: gravity, pressure, exposure to water, etc. These factors will become major considerations in 
the design and use of metallurgical processing technologies in space. The ambient conditions on the 
surface of the Earth have inherently led to the development of existing mineral processing and metal 
extraction technologies that take advantage of these conditions [1-3]. In some processes, such as 
pressure leaching or separation via cyclones, the prevailing conditions are enhanced, usually through 
increasing pressure or gravity to enhance separation. Conditions more relevant to processing at the 
lunar surface, such as the reduction of pressure or gravity, are rarely if ever considered in process plant 
design. In addition, most Earth-based mineral separation processes use water as a fluidising medium to 
effect separation and, whilst water management in a processing plant can consume significant resources, 
there is always a fundamental assumption that water will be available for use. The ready supply of water 
will almost certainly not be the case in off-Earth environments. When considering the development of 
mineral processing and metal extraction technologies for use in space, these accepted assumptions are 
of critical importance. The challenging reality is that the majority of processing technologies that have 
been refined over hundreds of years for use on Earth may not work in space. This is not to say that all 
current technologies are useless, some may be able to be adapted with only minor modifications but the 
question must be raised of whether the modification of technologies designed for use on Earth will 
result in the most efficient processing technologies. In the words of Haskin [4] when considering lunar 
processing, “Processes that take advantage of the lunar environment deserve at least equal attention”. 
A significant amount of work has been invested over the last 60 years into the conceptualisation 
and demonstration of resource extraction from lunar minerals. This work has predominantly focused on 
the production of oxygen [5, 6], however, the production of oxygen from a metal oxide often results in 
a metallic by-product and thus is of interest in the form of a potential metallurgical extraction technique. 
On that note, while the target resource of traditional extractive metallurgy has always been metals, in 
the case of astrometallurgical processing, oxygen recovery will also play a significant role in process 
economic viability. Finally, the resources extracted in the methods presented in this review are aimed 
at use in space. While for terrestrially rarer resources it may, in the future, become economically viable 
to transport them back down to Earth, the costs of transport are currently too high. The current work 
will assume all extracted resources are intended for use in space-based activities. 
The development of robust mineral processing and metal extraction processes and equipment for 
use on the Moon will require a thorough understanding of how the local environment will affect existing 
processes. In some cases, existing processes will need only minor modifications for conversion for In 
Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU) activities; in others, entirely new processes will be required to perform 
tasks that have been rendered uneconomical by the local environment. The current work, therefore, 
focusses on the broader problem of processing on the lunar surface and the effects, both beneficial and 
detrimental, of the lunar environmental conditions on potential mineral extraction and metal reduction 
technologies. The oxidised metal feedstocks available on the lunar surface will be described, along with 
the characteristics of their occurrence: grain size, geochemical and modal composition, and general 
petrography. The ambient conditions on the Moon will be contrasted to those of Earth and the effects 

on metallurgical equipment and processes will be discussed. Historically proposed metal extraction 
processes will be analysed for viability in industrial sized processing operations. Finally, the potential 
beneficial effects of the ‘challenging’ lunar environment will be discussed in terms of possible avenues 
for the development of novel technologies optimised for use in space. It will be shown in the current 
work that there is a large amount of research that will be required in the field of astrometallurgy before 
industrially sized mineral processing and metal reduction processes operating on off-Earth bodies can 
be considered viable options for a source of metal beyond low Earth orbit. 
Resource availability 
When designing an extraction process, knowledge of the specific chemical and mineralogical 
compositions, and the physical properties of a process feedstock are important. Compared to the level 
of detail usually required for process design on Earth, there is very limited data available as to the 
composition of the Moon. Though knowledge of lunar geology is restricted to the samples returned on 
the Apollo and Luna missions and from orbital mapping by satellites, there is a general consensus that 
the lunar geology is significantly more homogenous that that found on Earth [7, 8]. This homogeneity 
is attributed to the lack of surface altering processes on the Moon. On Earth, plate tectonics, active 
volcanism, and weathering play significant roles in the geochemical and mineralogical evolution and 
composition of the feed materials used in mineral processing and metal extraction technologies. Unlike 
Earth, the predominant surface altering process on the Moon is that of meteoric and micro-meteoric 
impacts [9].  This natural comminution of the lunar surface results in two main potential feed sources 
for industrial mineral processing and metal extraction processes, the bedrock, and the fine-grained 
material formed by this natural weathering, the regolith. In the current work we will look at both 
potential feedstocks, the bedrock and the regolith, however, more focus will be given to the regolith 
material as it is a more viable feedstock as will be discussed here. 
Petrographically, the Moon is divided into two major regions, the lighter coloured Al-rich 
Highlands or Terra, and the darker Fe- and Ti-rich Maria or Mare. Figure 1 clearly shows these two 
major petrographic regions on the near side of the Moon. The majority of the far side of the Moon is 
characterised by comprising more Highlands type material. For more detailed mapping based on 
Clementine data [10] see the ternary element diagrams presented by Spudis et al. [11]. 
Lunar rocks 
The composition of ten returned lunar rock samples, representing the presumed composition of 
the bedrock based on Apollo mission samples, are provided in Table 1. The data, in mass percent, are 
split into Mare and Highlands compositions and represent examples of the main rock types encountered 
during lunar exploration to date [12]. Further detail on these rock types and detailed mineralogical and 
geochemical analysis can be found elsewhere [8, 13-16]. 
Highland bedrock geology appears to vary somewhat with a large fraction being predominantly 
anorthositic in nature. In the Maria, there are two main categories, the High-Ti, and Low-Ti maria [12]. 
Mapping of the bedrock compositions on the Moon is difficult as most areas are covered in a layer of 
regolith material. The comminution mechanism that forms the regolith also results in the mixing of the 
regolith from different petrographic areas, as such, the composition of the regolith tends to be more 
homogenous than that of the underlying bedrock. 
 

 
Figure 1 - Black and white image of the Moon showing the major petrographic regions. The lighter coloured Al-rich 
Highlands, and the darker more Ti- and Fe-rich Mare. (Image: NASA). 
Table 1 - Common lunar rock chemical compositions (mass %). Table constructed using data summarised from Duke 
et al. [12]. 
Mare Rocks 
Highland Rocks 
 
High-
Ti 
Low-
Ti 
Very 
Low-Ti 
Al-rich 
Anorthosite 
Norite 
Troctolite 
KREEP 
Basalt* 
QMD** 
Granite 
SiO2  
39.7 
45.8 
46 
46.4 
45.3 
51.1 
42.9 
50.8 
56.9 
74.2 
TiO2 
11.2 
2.8 
1.1 
2.6 
<0.02 
0.34 
0.05 
2.2 
1.1 
0.33 
Al2O3  
9.5 
9.6 
12.1 
13.6 
34.2 
15 
20.7 
14.8 
6.4 
12.5 
Cr2O3  
0.37 
0.56 
0.27 
0.4 
0.004 
0.38 
0.11 
0.31 
0.16 
0.002 
FeO 
19.0 
20.2 
22.1 
16.8 
0.5 
10.7 
5.0 
10.6 
18.6 
2.32 
MnO 
0.25 
0.27 
0.28 
0.26 
0.008 
0.17 
0.07 
0.16 
0.28 
0.02 
MgO 
7.8 
9.7 
6.0 
8.5 
0.21 
12.9 
19.1 
8.2 
4.7 
0.07 
CaO  
11.2 
10.2 
11.6 
11.2 
19.8 
8.8 
11.4 
9.7 
8.3 
1.3 
Na2O 
0.38 
0.34 
0.26 
0.4 
0.45 
0.38 
0.2 
0.73 
0.52 
0.52 
K2O 
0.05 
0.06 
0.02 
0.01 
0.11 
0.18 
0.03 
0.67 
2.17 
8.6 
P2O5 
0.06 
0.05 
0.03 
0.7 
1.33 
S 
0.19 
0.09 
Total  
99.7 
99.7 
99.7 
100.2 
100.6 
99.9 
99.6 
98.9 
100.5 
99.9 
Ref. 
[13] 
[13] 
[14] 
[14] 
[15] 
[15] 
[15] 
[15] 
[15] 
[15] 
*a feldspathic basalt characterised by elevated levels of Potassium (K), Rare Earth Elements (REE), and Phosphorus (P).  
**Quartz Monzodiorite 
When dealing with macro concentrations, the composition of the lunar surface is composed 
primarily of those elements listed in Table 1. In addition to the major elements, there are a number of 

volatile elements that are known to exist within the regolith and surface lunar rock. These elements are 
implanted through impact activity and account for less than 1% of the total lunar surface chemistry. The 
two predominant suspected sources of volatiles are the solar wind and small solar system bodies 
(meteoroids, comets, and asteroids), however, other origins such as intergalactic dust and endogenous 
sources also exist [17]. The implanted volatiles are measured in the ppm range and consist among them 
a number of potentially useful elements such as H, C, N, He, F and Cl. Table 2 shows the average values 
of these elements in Apollo rock and regolith samples, note that these volatiles exist in significantly 
higher concentrations in the regolith material as opposed to rock samples, this is presumably due to the 
higher surface area available for solar wind deposition [18]. Other volatile elements that can be found 
in ppm and ppb concentrations within the lunar regolith are: He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, Zn, Cd, Au, Ge, Ag, 
Pb, Tl, S, Sb, Br, and others [17]. These elements will not be considered in the current work, however, 
there exists the potential for them to be the target of resource extraction in the future. 
Table 2 - Implanted H, C, N, F, Cl and He concentrations of Apollo samples, data by Fegley and Swingle [18]. 
Element 
Sample type 
Average content (ppm) 
H 
Regolith 
46 
Basalt 
2.7 
C 
Regolith 
124 
Basalt 
26 
N 
Regolith 
81 
 
Basalt 
19 
F 
Regolith 
70 
Cl 
Regolith 
30 
4He 
Regolith 
14 
3He 
Regolith 
0.0042 
 
As discussed briefly above, due to the more accessible nature of the regolith on the lunar surface, 
and the costs associated with the transport of hard rock mining equipment from Earth, this material is 
considered of most interest in terms of lunar SRU feedstocks. In the following section, the properties 
of the lunar regolith are discussed with reference to how these may be exploited in mineral processing 
operations. 
The lunar regolith 
The unconsolidated layer of regolith material varies between 2 to 10 m in depth all over the Moon 
[7-9]. Due to impact weathering, the lunar regolith is very glassy; this glass is often found in the form 
of breccias, agglutinates, or as minerals embedded in a glass matrix [7, 8, 16]. Impact weathering also 
results in a lack of smoothing of small particles and rocks that would be expected from terrestrial 
weathering processes. The high glass content and jagged grain surfaces results in the regolith being a 
very abrasive substance, the consequences of which cannot be ignored when considering processing 
equipment wear rates and handling procedures. 
The average grain size of the returned lunar regolith samples can be seen in Figure 2. The data 
used here consists of 127 data sets sorted from that presented by Graf [19]. This data consists of samples 
from Apollo 12, 15, 16, 17, and Luna 24. The mean P50, or 50% passing size of this data set is 69µm. 
The P80, more often used for mineral processing analysis, is 257µm. When compared to a standard 
target size for a ball mill discharge, this is quite course, and there exists significant variability within 
the regolith in terms of grain sizes. In this data set there were samples that ranged from a P80 of 96µm 
to 2426µm. The regolith consists of a relatively large fraction of ultra-fine material with extreme cases 
such as soil #66075,16 which consisted of 41% passing 20 µm [19]. 

 
Figure 2 – Average particle size distribution of Apollo and Luna returned regolith samples, presented in %passing 
sieve size. Data from Graf [19], sorted to most common sieve set only. 
Table 3 shows the geochemical composition of 9 regolith samples returned on the Apollo and 
Luna missions in mass percent. These data have been ordered from least FeO to most FeO in the sample 
roughly equating to more Highlands type material to Maria type respectively. Detailed analysis of these 
samples can be found elsewhere [16, 20-23]. Until more detailed mapping and sampling campaigns can 
be completed on the lunar surface providing higher resolution resource maps and confirming or 
disproving the existence of localised metal concentrations as found on Earth, the regolith compositions 
displayed here are the presumed range of compositions available for SRU feedstock material on the 
Moon. 
Table 3 - Returned regolith sample compositions (mass %), ordered by FeO content from left to right. Data from Papike 
et al. [16] 
Mission 
Apollo 
16 
Luna 
20 
Apollo 
14 
Apollo 
17 
Apollo 
15 
Apollo 
12 
Apollo 
11 
Luna 
16 
Luna 
24 
Sample 
64501 
22001 
14163 
76501 
15271 
12033 
10084 
21000 
24999 
SiO2  
45.2 
* 
47.4 
42.8 
46.3 
47.0 
41.3 
* 
* 
TiO2 
0.4 
0.5 
1.6 
3.3 
1.4 
2.5 
7.3 
3.3 
1.0 
Al2O3 
27.6 
22.9 
17.5 
18.2 
16.2 
13.8 
13.6 
14.9 
11.1 
Cr2O3 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 
0.3 
0.4 
FeO 
4.4 
7.4 
10.4 
11.1 
12.9 
15.1 
16.0 
16.4 
20.3 
MnO 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
0.3 
MgO 
4.7 
8.9 
10.1 
11.9 
11.1 
9.5 
8.3 
8.3 
10.4 
CaO 
16.6 
14.2 
11.3 
12.3 
11.1 
10.6 
12.3 
11.8 
10.7 
Na2O 
0.4 
0.3 
0.7 
0.4 
0.5 
0.7 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 
K2O 
0.1 
0.1 
0.6 
0.1 
0.2 
0.4 
0.2 
0.1 
0.0 
Total 
99.6 
* 
99.9 
100.5 
100.2 
100.1 
99.9 
* 
* 
*No Si assays exist from this data set for the Luna samples [20]. For an estimate, the Si 
content can be calculated as the remainder. 
 

One other metric by which the lunar regolith varies from that found on Earth is the lack of water. 
This lack of water on the Moon affects the geochemistry and mineralogy of the feed material. Minerals 
containing ferric iron (Fe3+) were noticeably absent in the returned Apollo and Luna samples along with 
any minerals that contain water (clays, micas, amphiboles, etc.)[7, 8]. While large quantities of water 
have been confirmed in permanently shadowed regions (PSRs) on the lunar poles [24, 25], and have 
been proposed to exist in other PSRs even in equatorial regions [26]. No physical samples of these areas 
have been examined to date. It is unclear how much of this water is in the form of water ice and how 
much is included within rocks themselves in the form of hydrated minerals. Regardless of the potential 
existence of hydrated minerals in these PSRs, most of the regolith available on the Moon as feedstock 
for extractive metallurgical processes will be anhydrous. Water ice mining for life support and rocket 
fuel will almost certainly be one of the first forms of industrial activity on the lunar surface and these 
topics have been extensively covered [17, 27-36]. There is an argument to be made that the use of 
material that has been already processed to remove the water and other volatiles may become an 
important feedstock for metal extraction processes as this approach will minimise material handling 
and mining activities, however there is no indication that the base regolith composition from these 
volatile rich regions varies compared to that presented here. 
The bulk modal composition of the Apollo 16 regolith sample #64501 can be seen in Figure 3. 
This data, presented by Papike et al. [16] (1000 to 90 µm) and Labotka et al. [23] (90 to 20 µm, and 20 
to 10 µm), shows the significant glassy nature of the regolith. Different glass types and mineral types 
have been combined in this figure for simplicity. The 64501 sample is a good representation of ‘clean’ 
highlands material [16], that is, regolith that has been derived from predominantly highlands bedrock 
with minimal mixing of maria derived components, this can be seen in Table 3 by the low FeO and 
TiO2 content. The smaller size fractions of this sample are largely composed of glass and monomineralic 
fragments, whereas the larger size fraction consists of significantly larger amounts of fused soil 
components and lithic fragments. 
 
 
Figure 3 –Simplified modal composition of the lunar regolith sample #64501 split into three size fractions (1000 to 90 µm, 
90 to 20  µm, and 20 to 10 µm), data from Papike et al. [16], and Labotka et al.[23]. 
The exact effects on processing technologies of the mineralogical and geochemical differences 
between terrestrial and lunar feedstocks, the high glass content and lack of hydrated minerals in the 
lunar regolith, is uncertain. These effects may be minimal, but it is yet again a factor that warrants 
further investigation. 

Target metals  
Whilst most materials found on the Moon are not in sufficient concentrations to be considered 
ore on Earth, their mere existence outside Earth’s gravity-well, and thus significant reduction in 
transportation costs for use in space, make them significantly more valuable [35]. As noted previously 
and contrary to a common misconception, the mining and processing of space-native resources is 
currently solely targeted towards space-based industry. The transport of resources down to earth in 
industrial quantities is currently too expensive to be considered as a competitive alternative to terrestrial 
industry. Initially, space materials processing will be targeted towards materials that will enable lunar 
colonization and provide propellant to space missions; however, with time, any material that can be 
efficiently harvested on the Moon will become valuable for use beyond low Earth orbit.  
The main metals contained in the lunar regolith along with some of their potential uses can be 
found in Table 4. It is important to note that along with the impacts on processing equipment that will 
be covered later in the current work, the effect of gravity and vacuum on construction materials, namely 
the lowered strength requirements for structural support and the lack of oxidising atmosphere, render 
metals such as aluminium much more viable for bulk construction than they would normally be 
considered on Earth. There has also been considerable research into the use of ceramics and waterless 
concretes using raw, unprocessed regolith; such uses do not require significant processing and are 
outside the scope of the current work. For a recent review of these potential extra-terrestrial construction 
materials see Naser [37, 38]. 
Table 4 - Metals available for extraction on the lunar surface 
Metal 
Uses 
Refs 
Silicon 
Electronics and photovoltaic panels, 
Silanes (SiHx) as rocket fuel alternative. 
Energy carrier/storage 
[39-41] 
Aluminium 
Construction material (pure or alloyed) 
Solid powder as rocket fuel 
Energy carrier/storage 
[33, 37, 38, 41-43] 
Iron 
Construction material (pure or alloyed) 
Energy carrier/storage 
[37, 38, 41] 
Magnesium 
Construction material (alloyed) 
Solid powder as rocket fuel 
Energy carrier/storage 
[33, 37, 38, 41] 
Titanium 
Construction material (pure or alloyed) 
Energy carrier/storage 
[37, 38, 41] 
Manganese 
Construction material (alloyed) 
Energy carrier/storage 
[37, 38, 41] 
Chromium 
Construction material (alloyed) 
[35, 37] 
Sodium 
Thermal fluid/coolant 
Energy carrier/storage 
[41, 44] 
Potassium 
Thermal fluid/coolant 
Energy carrier/storage 
[41, 45] 
 
Properties of Earth versus the Moon and relevant effects on processing 
Current comminution, beneficiation, metal production, and standard business practices for 
mining on Earth have all been developed and refined over time with base assumptions that come 
inherently from the physical and chemical conditions found on Earth. With the intent to expand such 
operations to the Moon, these practices need to be examined in detail in terms of the likely effect(s) that 
these changed conditions will have on them. Here we will analyse the main metrics that differ between 

the Earth and the Moon, the immediate effects these differences will have, and some of the more esoteric 
follow on effects that need to be considered in order to establish industrial scale mineral processing and 
metal extraction processes on the Moon. A comparison of some of the key metrics is provided in Table 
5. This table considers inherent natural factors such as gravity, pressure, average surface temperatures, 
and other key aspects. Human-induced factors involving supply chain costs and access to a human 
workforce, also warrant significant consideration and are discussed below. 
Table 5 - Comparison of the environmental effects of the Earth versus Moon on processing, adapted from Rasera [46], and 
Gibson and Knudsen [47] 
Factor 
Earth 
Moon 
Impact 
Gravity 
9.8 m/s2 
1.62 m/s2 
Impacts density separations; 
Reduces gravity-driven fluid/particle flow; 
Increases influence of non-gravity motive forces 
(surface tension, magnetic attraction etc.); 
Decreases head pressure, increasing potential pumping 
heights; 
Average 
surface 
temperature 
14 °C 
(Day and 
Night) 
123 °C (Day) 
-178 °C 
(Night) 
Temperature variation will affect particle properties e.g. 
Equipment must be able to survive extreme thermal 
variations. 
Pressure 
1 atm. 
Unmeasured 
(Day) 
3x10-15 atm 
(Night) 
 
Fluids must be used in a closed system with artificial 
pressure; 
Reduction in energy requirements for dissociation; 
Convective cooling not an option outside of closed 
systems. 
Human 
access 
Abundant 
Severely 
restricted 
Highly reliable equipment (uncommon in terrestrial 
mining and metallurgy) is necessary. 
Modular designs will facilitate repairs/replacements.  
Automated robotic/remote controlled uncrewed 
equipment preferable. 
Day/Night 
cycle 
24 hours 
708.7 hours 
Regolith becomes less charged at night (no UV 
charging) 
Equipment cooling/heating is power intensive. 
Power generation at night becomes challenging, 
requires large power storage for solar based power 
solutions. 
Water 
Availability 
Plentiful 
Rare 
Resource 
 
Geochemical effects on feed material. 
Comminution and beneficiation processes need to be 
designed without the use of water. 
Renders the majority of terrestrial technologies useless. 
Dust 
Easily 
supressed 
Electrostatic, 
abrasive, and 
everywhere 
Dust suppression and/or mitigation technologies will 
become essential. 
 
Gravity 
One of the most used and overlooked environmental factors in mineral processing and metal 
production technologies is gravity. The Moon has one sixth of the gravity of Earth at its surface, which 
has wide implications for most processes used in a mineral processing and metal extraction flowsheet.. 
Whilst some equipment in a generic mineral processing plant, such as slurry pumps, benefit from a lack 
of gravity due to the reduction of head pressures, the majority of the major processes utilise gravity as 
a motive force within the equipment or at least as a feed and discharge mechanism. Ball mills for 
example are unable to operate in microgravity environments, in reduced gravity environments they are 
theoretically usable but require significant upscaling. A ball mill of 10 m diameter would need to be 

increased to a diameter of 60 m for an equivalent power draw on the Moon [48], this is a size increase 
of 6 times and represents a large increase in required construction materials. Some equipment such as 
gravity separators and flotation cells have variants that use centripetal force, replacing gravity with the 
apparent centrifugal force, these equipment variants may be usable in reduced gravity environments 
with minor alterations to existing designs. 
One potentially important side effect of micro-gravity conditions is the effect of surface tension 
on the wetting capabilities of ores and reagents. When considering heap leaching as a potential 
concentration technique, very rarely is the question raised of wetting capabilities, gravity and some 
minor agitation are usually enough to saturate all mineral surfaces when exposed to, for example, an 
acid. This assumption is challenged under microgravity and to a lesser extent under the reduced gravity 
conditions on the Moon. In reduced gravity conditions the surface tension of the liquid plays a larger 
role in the mixing process. Whilst 1/6 g may be enough to render this a non-issue on the Moon, the 
topic warrants at least cursory inquiry when considering the formation of a slurry. 
It is possible to artificially induce gravity using apparent centrifugal force. Terrestrially, this 
method is only used to create increased apparent gravity environments which are used to increase 
separation efficiencies of processes predicated on separation due to density [1, 2]. The design of 
equipment that uses artificial gravity to simulate Earth like conditions (9.8 m/s2 acceleration), whilst 
possible, is costly in terms of construction material mass and energy requirements for operation, and 
should thus be avoided if possible.  
Pressure 
When considering pressure on the lunar surface it is important to distinguish between absolute 
measured pressure and the expected pressure range of operation, as this will be increased by a prolonged 
human and robotic presence on the lunar surface. The absolute pressure measured at night on the lunar 
surface by equipment placed on the Apollo 14 and 15 missions was 3x10-15 atm [49]. Daytime 
measurements were ‘contaminated’ by off-gassing from the equipment itself [49]. This leads to the 
clarification that whilst the number of 3x10-15 atm given as the pressure for the natural lunar atmosphere 
at night is correct in theory, in practice, this pressure is expected to rise during the day [50]. 
Human or robotic activity will have a noticeable effect on the natural lunar pressure, however, 
any artificial increase in pressure will naturally dissipate over time [50]. Whilst not relevant for near 
term activity, when much larger industrial operations are considered on the Moon some thought will 
need to be given to gas discharge rates in terms of their effect on the atmosphere. It was estimated by 
Vondrak [50] that a constant artificial gas discharge rate (from venting, sublimation of volatiles during 
excavation/mining, rocket powered ascent and decent, and other factors) averaging above 10 to 100 
kg/s would theoretically cause a transition on the Moon to a longer lived atmosphere which equates to 
pressures above ~10-10 atm [50]. Release rates of this magnitude will not be reached by small scale 
operations and infrequent rocket powered ascent/descents. For reference, each Apollo mission resulted 
in the release of ~104 kg of rocket exhaust [51] which almost doubled the mass of the lunar atmosphere 
for a short period. A benefit to the natural loss rates is that if the artificial gas release is stopped (like in 
the case of a single rocket launch), the lunar atmosphere will naturally revert back to its original pressure 
over time [52]. 
The pressure on the Moon, or the lack of gas present under ambient lunar conditions, has varied 
physical and chemical effects. Take for example the standard passive cooling techniques used for most 
industrial pumps and motors which rely on convective heat transport to maintain safe operating 
temperatures. Under vacuum conditions convective heat transport is not a reliable method of cooling. 
Instead, equipment that includes conductive and radiative heat management will need to be 
implemented. Similarly, with a lack of ambient atmosphere, dust management becomes significantly 
harder. The effect of air resistance on the travel distance of falling dust and larger particles is easy to 

overlook. Agosto [53] whilst testing magnetic and electrostatic separation of Apollo 10 regolith (Sample 
ID #10084,853), concluded that for electrostatic separators, “Existing designs with minor modifications 
would probably work very well in a gas[pressurised] environment established on the Moon, but major 
modifications are required for efficient vacuum operation.” [53]. 
There are also significant physiochemical effects. One of these is that of the effect of pressure on 
phase transitions between condensed and dispersed phases, namely that material will start to evaporate 
and sublimate at lower temperatures than required on Earth. Solids, as they are heated up, will start to 
directly sublimate into a vapour phase at these low pressures. Along with the effects on water-based 
processing mentioned in Table 5, this also affects molten phases. Whilst the total pressure does not 
affect the vapor pressure of, for example, oxides, and thus the kinetics of sublimation are very slow 
[54]; the lower temperature vaporisation of materials is thermodynamically favoured. This is one of the 
significant disadvantages to processes such as molten oxide electrolysis in which a molten phase is 
required as an electrical energy carrier, the operation of such a processes in the natural vacuum on the 
Moon will result in a steady, if small, loss of material to evaporation. Similarly, processes that require 
gas-solid reactions (for example hydrogen and carbothermal reduction) will require pressurised 
atmospheres to operate, as in these processes, pressure correlates to the rate of the reaction [55]. It is 
interesting to note that in such cases, unless un-protected human access is required, there may be 
benefits to creating an artificial atmosphere that is significantly higher in pressure than 1 atm to further 
promote the reaction kinetics. 
The second chemical effect of the high vacuum environment of interest for metal production is 
its influence on metal compound stability. There is a direct correlation between total pressure and the 
energy required for metal compound reduction, namely less energy is required to reduce a metal 
compound into gaseous products at lower pressures [56]. An Ellingham diagram generated at the 
minimum measured pressure on the Moon can be seen in Figure 4. This diagram has been generated 
using the FactSage thermochemical modelling software package, more detailed descriptions of this 
diagram can be found in other work [56]. Further information on the modelling package can likewise 
be found elsewhere [57-59]. 
The Ellingham diagram in Figure 4 shows the low temperatures theoretically required for oxide 
reduction on the Moon. At equilibrium, all plotted oxides in an isolated system are in a reduced vapor 
phase above 1650 °C. Whilst the maintenance of any system at a pressure as low as 3x10-15 atm with 
gas evolution taking place is functionally impossible, this figure is and extreme example showing the 
theoretical effect of the ambient lunar pressure.  
The field of vacuum metallurgy has been well studied historically and the use of vacuum in 
industrial processes has been successfully demonstrated [60]. These vacuum metallurgy processes tend 
to operate at ‘low vacuum’ pressures down to ~10-5 atm, this lower pressure limit being due to the 
available high flow pumping equipment for industrial sized operations. On Earth, the energy required 
to pull a vacuum in a reactor is higher than the amount saved by this vacuums’ effect on the reduction 
energy requirement [61]. Therefore, vacuum is used on Earth as a form of extreme inert atmosphere, 
i.e. to remove the complication of the gas inside the reactor reacting with one of the products or 
complicating the chemical reduction pathway [60]. The ambient pressure conditions on the Moon 
theoretically remove the requirement for, and limitation of, the pumping equipment; high vacuum 
conditions (<10-10 atm) are readily available with minimal energy requirements due to pumping if an 
open reactor design is implemented. The ability to use this natural vacuum environment to reduce the 
energy requirements for metal reduction processes is relatively unexplored, but has great potential for 
future astrometallurgical applications [62]. 
 
 

 
Figure 4 - Ellingham diagram plotted at a total pressure of 3x10-15 atm. Diagram generated using FactSage 7.2 
software package and relevant databases (FTOxid, FactPS). 
Day/Night cycle and Energy Generation 
The synodic period on the Moon, a lunar day, is 29.53 (Earth) days or 708.72 hours [63]. This 
results in two Earth weeks of constant access to sunlight and an equal time with no access to sunlight. 
The illumination on the lunar surface during the day averages 1361 W/m2 [64] which varies throughout 
the year and decreases based on the angle of incidence. This is the same flux that hits the upper 
atmosphere of Earth, however, on the Moon this solar flux is not attenuated by the atmosphere and 
weather phenomenon.  
Such a long duration for days and nights will cause significant issues with any continuous 
processing operation. Any solar powered processes, be that electrically using photovoltaic cells or 
directly using concentrated solar thermal energy, will have to be run in some variant of a long batch 
process. For a more traditional process setup (without a solar furnace) there exists the potential to run 
off nuclear energy or battery power during the night, however, the size of the batteries required may 
necessitate in-situ fabrication. A secondary option is the use of orbital solar power stations, also called 
solar power satellites (SPS) [39, 65], these are a potential energy solution in the future that operate by 
collecting energy in orbit and transferring it wirelessly down to the planet or moon. SPS may end up 

being an ideal technology but are yet to be implemented and require significant investment to set up 
without extra-terrestrially derived construction materials.  
An alternative to nuclear power and SPS is to operate in the polar regions. Due to the Moons low 
inclination to the ecliptic, there exist areas on the lunar poles, specifically crater ridgelines, that have 
access to sunlight for the majority of the year. These areas, colloquially called the ‘peaks of eternal 
light’[66], are illuminated for up to 82.9% of the year at ground level [67]. This increased access to 
sunlight, and subsequent ability to operate primarily from solar power sources has prompted significant 
interest in these geographical locations [67-71]. 
Regardless of the power source chosen, energy will be a significant resource that needs to be 
monitored carefully, especially when considering the large energy requirements usually associated with 
mineral processing and metal extraction activities [1, 2]. A detailed analysis for any proposed process 
or equipment for use on the Moon will need to be completed that considers the trade-off between 
production rate, energy requirements, and the efficiency of that process or equipment. The minimisation 
of electrical and thermal energy requirements within processes will be significantly favoured in 
industrial scale metal production facilities. 
Surface Temperatures 
The large amount of solar flux and the lack of air for convective heat transport result is a large 
natural temperature range on the Moon. The temperature in equatorial regions ranges from 123 °C 
during the day to -178 °C at night [72]. The high temperature is reached when a material reaches thermal 
equilibrium, this low temperature however does not represent thermal equilibrium and is instead 
reached just before sunrise [72]. This is due to the fact that when shadowed, heat will continue to radiate 
away from a substance. In PSRs where thermal equilibrium can be reached, this results in cryogenic 
temperatures of <-220 °C [72]. Whilst not to this extreme, there is a notable temperature drop between 
illuminated and shadowed areas even during the day. These extremes in temperature can cause a 
significant issue for industrial activities. This high temperature range between illuminated and 
shadowed areas will necessitate careful design and material selection of any industrial equipment meant 
for use on the surface. 
During the day, when illuminated parts of equipment will experience high temperatures, and 
shadowed parts, low temperatures. The ability to regulate temperature will be important. Equipment 
will need to either be able to operate with large temperature gradients within the structure or utilise 
thermally conductive substances, like heat pipes and coolants, connected to radiators in order to manage 
heat build-up. One method that was used on the Apollo missions during transit between Earth and the 
Moon to minimise thermal loading on the craft was an intentional slow roll. This slow roll of the craft 
termed Passive Thermal Control (PTC), balanced the thermal loading due to sunlight and stopped any 
one side of the craft from getting too hot [73]. Where equipment cannot be designed to operate with 
large temperature differences within its structure, PTC-type mechanisms may prove useful. 
Temperature variation between night and day poses an entirely different issue on extraction 
equipment. Any equipment that will be operated outside of an artificial atmosphere will need to be able 
to withstand extended periods of cryogenic temperatures during the night. Such temperatures are known 
to significantly decrease the strength of some construction materials, such as high strength steel [74]. 
The thermal control of the core essential electronics on lunar rovers has been accomplished historically 
by the use of a ‘warm electronics box’ [75]. This is a system that during the day will shed excess heat 
from the system to a radiator. At night, the connection to the radiator is cut and heat loss is minimised, 
extra heat is provided by heaters to maintain the required operating temperature [75]. This method 
works well but is currently only implemented for the small units attached to rovers. For industrial sized 
mining equipment significant modifications will need to be made. This required heating of areas that 
contain temperature sensitive material, will represent an increased electrical load during the night. The 

need to include temperature regulation systems in all equipment is critical for operation but should not 
present significant issues in terms of processing options. 
Water Availability 
A primary concern for the conversion of terrestrial mineral processing technologies for use in 
space and specifically on the Moon is the significant lack of available water. With the exception of 
some mineral sands processing techniques (e.g. electrostatic and magnetic separation), the vast majority 
of mineral processing technologies rely heavily on water for operation. Whilst water is available on the 
Moon in PSRs [24-26, 76], this water will be an expensive commodity in its own right [28]. Assuming 
a source of water can be found to enable the use of water in the metallurgical processes, a second 
significant issue arises when considering the physical effects of the vacuum on any liquid substances 
as mentioned above. The pressures present on the lunar surface lie well below the triple point of water 
[77], this means that in order to stop the spontaneous evaporation of the water the pressure of the 
processing system would need to be artificially increased. Similarly, in order to stop solidification or 
vaporisation of the water at average day and night temperatures on the Moon, the system would need 
to be heavily temperature regulated. Given the predicted costs of water on the Moon [28], and the 
difficulty of creating large, pressurised, temperature regulated environments in which to use it, it is 
important to consider alternatives to water-based mineral processing technologies. 
Dust 
The Lunar dust is the fine (<50µm) portion of the regolith material [8]. The lunar dust is very 
abrasive and, due to its glassy composition, fine size, and large surface area to volume ratio, is extremely 
prone to building up an electrostatic charge [78]. Due to its propensity to build up a static charge, and 
the interaction between this charge and the natural plasma sheath found near the lunar surface, the dust 
has been found to naturally levitate [79]. This levitation is affected strongly by the day night cycle and 
as such, the terminus between day and night is accompanied by significant dust movement [78]. The 
natural levitation of the dust, along with its electrostatic charge make is impossible to operate on the 
lunar surface without the dust adhering to most open surfaces causing multiple issues. A NASA report 
on the effect of the dust identified nine main areas in which the dust was, on the Apollo missions, and 
would continue to be, for future endeavours, an issue in terms of its effect on Extra-Vehicular Activity 
(EVA) on the Moon [80]. These nine areas were: 
• 
Vision obscuration, 
• 
False instrument readings, 
• 
Dust coating and contamination, 
• 
Loss of traction, 
• 
Clogging of mechanisms, 
• 
Abrasion, 
• 
Thermal control problems, 
• 
Seal failures, and 
• 
Inhalation and irritation. 
It was noted by Gaier [80] that “The severity of the dust problems [on the Apollo missions] were 
consistently underestimated by ground tests…”. Dust will be a significant issue for any operation on 
the Moon, industrial or otherwise. Whilst the presence of dust should not invalidate any specific 
processing technologies, the general awareness of its effects and modification to equipment to enable a 
minimisation of its impact will be critical. Of specific concern is the protection of any rotating or 
mechanical equipment. Due to the highly abrasive nature of the dust, the protection of joints and rotating 
surfaces, prevalent in mineral processing operations, will be a complex problem. The dust also poses 
significant potential issues in terms of human health similar to those associated with silicosis, there is 

concern over the lack of understanding as to the toxicity of the lunar dust on humans [81]. Technologies 
that can be used to shield or remove dust from equipment [82-84] will be extremely beneficial for both 
crewed and un-crewed lunar industrial activity. 
Supply Chain Issues 
One of the primary arguments for SRU is Supply chain lead times and the reduction in the mass 
of the payloads carried up to orbit from Earth, often referred to as the up-mass. Up-mass minimisation 
is critical to the economic viability of any mission due to the related transport costs. Current estimates 
of USD $35,000 per kilogram from Earth to the lunar surface (bulk haulage) [28, 85] are expected to 
significantly reduce in coming years due to the privatisation of launch capacities [86, 87]. However, the 
economic argument for ISRU relies on the fact that the cost of transport from Earth is extremely high 
as compared to the cost of production of the same resources from local materials. This renders the idea 
of transporting equipment for terrestrial type mining and processing up to the Moon almost impossible 
from an economic standpoint [88]. Regardless of cost, the transit time for a cargo shipment using current 
technologies is large. The Apollo missions took in excess of 100 hours from launch to touch down on 
the Moon [73]. Fuel optimised trajectories, which cost less in fuel, can take months; SpaceIL’s robotic 
Beresheet mission took a total of 48 days before hard landing on the lunar surface [89]. Such long lead 
times render emergency re-supply a non-option for most operations and play heavily into some of the 
health and safety concerns that will be explored below. 
The cost of transport to the lunar surface is often cited as a justification for ISRU but 
simultaneously often forgotten in the proposal of processes for use in this field. This is especially 
notable in terms of extraction and reduction processes that use chemical reagents. In terrestrial processes 
the use of reagents is preferable if they generate a significant gain in product grade or recovery. 
However, supply chain logistics will become a significant issue in the operation of an extra-terrestrial 
processing facility. It is relatively simple to take a well-known terrestrial process, apply a lunar 
feedstock composition, and decide that this process is possible on the Moon. Ignoring the complexity 
of process modification to account for gravity as explored above, this paradigm ignores the significant 
cost involved with on-going reagent use. Some processes, such as hydrogen reduction of ilmenite, and 
carbothermal reduction, can theoretically be designed to recycle most of the reagent (H and C 
respectively), others such as solid electrolysis use an electrolyte as a reagent that can also theoretically 
be recycled with quite good recoveries. All of these processes will however need re-supply at industrial 
scales. Even small losses at laboratory scales, less than a percent for example, will result in tonnes of 
reagent loss after scale-up and will represent millions of dollars in transport costs if a terrestrial reagent 
source is used for resupply. Herein lies a challenge in the repurposing of terrestrial processing 
technology for extra-terrestrial use. These processes, though very well-known and at high technology 
readiness levels (TRL), are not optimised for use in space. Other processes, such as thermal dissociation 
and molten regolith electrolysis, that do not use reagents, are not well understood and require significant 
research in order to raise their TRL.  
Due to the launch costs involved in sending the material and equipment required to build a 
processing facility on the Moon, i.e. the up-mass cost portion of the capital expenditure (CAPEX), it is 
reasonable to conclude that it is economically beneficial for processing facilities to designed to be 
lightweight in nature. This compliments the assertion that a simple process schematic is best. A simple 
process schematic is good from an automation perspective, but also in terms of the required up-mass to 
begin processing operations. These considerations will of course change drastically when a lunar 
originating metallic feed stock is available for process plant construction/expansion. 
In terrestrial industry, the ready access to wear parts means that regular scheduled maintenance 
and replacement of such parts is considered an adequate measure to save on costs due to equipment 
failure and downtime. Unless wear parts can be manufactured locally, the cost of transporting these 
parts from Earth is prohibitive. Equipment design favouring long lasting operation will quickly become 

far superior to easily replaceable parts. This is particularly important when considering comminution 
circuit design which historically leans heavily on replaceable wear parts [1]. 
It is important to note that whilst most of the ‘detrimental’ effects of processing technologies 
mentioned herein, especially in regards to temperature and pressure, could be attenuated simply by 
creating a closed system in which such temperature and pressure are carefully controlled, the inclusion 
of the equipment required for a closed system would represent significantly higher equipment mass and 
thus initial payload mass and CAPEX estimates. Since the premise of ISRU technologies is specifically 
to reduce the required payload mass for extended habitation and exploration activities in space, this 
solution seems counterproductive. The concept of minimising launch costs will be referenced many 
times in this analysis and until equipment and resources can be routinely sourced from industries based 
off Earth, the cost of material transport from Earth to the Moon will severely limit the economic viability 
of many processing options. 
Radiation 
The surface of the Moon, somewhat protected from solar radiation by the Earths’ magnetosphere, 
experiences considerably higher radiation levels than the surface of Earth. Radiation on the lunar surface 
consists of electromagnetic (EM) radiation and energetic particles from the sun, as well as galactic 
cosmic rays [90]. On top of the background solar radiation, periodically large bursts of particles from 
the sun, termed solar particle events, can also impact the lunar surface. These solar particle events can 
be many orders of magnitude larger than the background radiation, and are very hard to predict [91]. 
On Earth, cosmic radiation accounts for an average of 0.4 mSv over a year in a human. On the Moon 
this number is estimated to increase to between 110 and 380 mSv per year depending on the solar cycle, 
and a single solar particle event can result in a potentially lethal dose of up to 1 Sv [91].  
This radiation has significant repercussions for both human habitation and material properties 
over time. The effect on human safety will be considered in the next section, however, both UV 
radiation and ionising radiation (protons and electrons) can significantly degrade construction materials, 
especially in the case of polymers [92, 93]. Ionising radiation can also damage electronic components 
and solar cells [92]. Though radiation does not impact lunar feedstocks the development of future 
processing equipment, and the requirement for shielding of some components from radiation will be 
essential. 
Human Access and Health and Safety 
Safety considerations are always a primary concern in the design and operation of terrestrial 
processing facilities, this will be no different in space. In fact, with a myriad more risks to consider for 
any operation, these risk assessments, both for occupational health and safety (OHS) and to mitigate 
the potential of equipment damage will be significantly more complicated. The use of human operators 
is assumed for terrestrial processing operations, and in space, requires a liveable habitat and all the 
health risks inherent in living in a pressure vessel in low gravity. The risk posed by radiation exposure 
to human crew is severe and requires significant shielding of a habitat to avoid lethal doses [91]. 
Similarly, the risk of a meteoric impact event, whilst a low likelihood, could have catastrophic effects 
in terms of OHS and equipment damage. One suggestion regarding mitigating such risk is to build 
habitats and facilities under the lunar surface itself [94-96]. Such an operation might entail more 
complicated energy arrangements, and communication infrastructure, but would protect equipment and 
humans from exposure to meteorites as well as radiation. 
Operations designed for human access would presumably be run in a manner similar to current 
Fly In Fly Out (FIFO) operations on Earth. However, these operations can be extremely large due to 
the myriad roles required to keep a camp operational. The most obvious answer is to move to automated 
machinery with the majority of non-automatable tasks able to be completed remotely from Earth, or in 

lunar orbit, with only troubleshooting and unforeseen maintenance completed by in-situ workers or 
rapid landing teams from an orbiting station. 
Remote Operation/Automation 
Due to the issues with human access, and the cost of transportation, the ability to remotely operate 
processing equipment and fully automating as much of the process as possible will be essential for 
extra-terrestrial processing operations. An ideal space-based industrial processing facility would be 
designed to operate without on-site human operators. Such a facility, while simple in theory, has never 
been done on Earth to date at any significant scale. Underground mining automation has slowly been 
progressing with safety and productivity as a motivating factor, and has seen great success in the cases 
of BHP and Rio Tinto operations in Australia [97, 98]. Mineral processing operations, however, are 
currently inherently too complicated and fickle to fully automate. Some success has been seen with the 
development of digital twins for prediction purposes [99] but this technology is a long way from 
allowing for the full automation of a minerals processing plant. It is unlikely that full automation will 
be possible, especially considering the certain eventuality of unforeseen maintenance requirements. It 
is interesting to consider however the pursuit of this type of processing facility and the alterations to 
plant design it would necessitate. 
Automation, whilst considered useful on Earth, comes secondary to production and cost. Human 
labour is comparatively extremely cheap on Earth and most risks considered manageable, however with 
expansion into space, remote operation will become more economical. The idea of designing a 
processing plant with complete automation (including maintenance and troubleshooting), as a pre-
requisite is a challenging prospect. This goal is a reasonable target when considering the aforementioned 
risks associated with human presence. An automated or even remote-controlled operation can be 
designed without all the requirements for human habitation and subsequent infrastructure, launch mass, 
and increased CAPEX requirements. This would represent a significant increase in economic viability 
of an SRU operation. In the pursuit of automation, it stands to reason that the most optimal processing 
plant will be a schematically simple process. The fewer moving parts, the fewer complicated 
interactions, the fewer pieces of critical equipment required, the more likely it is that a plant could, in 
theory, be automated. 
Recycling and waste generation 
Waste, or gangue, generation and handling is a significant part of any mineral processing 
operation. Terrestrially, waste materials from processing operations are often stored in large tailings 
dams that allow for water reclamation [100]. On the Moon, where materials handling needs to be 
minimised wherever possible to save on costs, such tailing materials should, where possible, be treated 
as a target for recycling or re-use. As presented by Naser [37, 38], the most obvious potential use for 
metal-depleted ‘gangue’ material is as a feedstock for additive manufacturing via sintering, or as a 
component in waterless concretes, for construction purposes. The reuse of previously handled materials 
in processing, and the recycling of industrial and human waste also fall within the expansive umbrella 
of ISRU [101]. In the context of the current work, we can conclude that processes that minimise waste 
or produce gangue streams in a form useable in other extra-terrestrial construction endeavours are 
preferable. Similarly, metal extraction processes that can operate with modified feed compositions that 
include industrial waste streams will be extremely valuable in promoting a more cyclical economy on 
the Moon. 
 
 

Comminution 
The initial step of most mineral processing operations is the comminution of the feed material 
[102]. In terms of equipment and processing plant design, the primary issues with the conversion of 
terrestrial comminution circuits for use on the Moon are: water availability, dust generation, energy 
requirements, supply chain costs (for wear parts), and gravity. Of these, gravity is the primary concern 
as it is used as a feed and discharge mechanism for all dry equipment and is the primary driving force 
of a number of processes. Table 6 shows some common comminution equipment and compares the 
effect of gravity on Earth to that found on the Moon. A ‘usability assessment’ for each piece of 
equipment has also been supplied. 
Table 6 - The effect of gravity on generic comminution equipment 
Equipment 
Use of gravity 
Effects of reduced gravity 
Usability assessment 
Pressure Crushers 
(Jaw, Gyratory) 
Feed and discharge, 
keeps rock from 
discharging upwards 
instead of crushing, 
dust suppression 
Crushing efficiency and throughput 
negatively affected, dust may travel 
a long way or be suspended for 
longer periods of time 
Medium (requires re-design) 
Impact Crushers 
(Vertical Shaft 
Impactors, 
Hammer Mills) 
Feed and discharge, 
keeps rock from 
discharging upwards 
instead of crushing, 
dust suppression 
Throughput lowered due to feed 
and discharge rates. Crushing 
mechanism not affected. Increased 
dust generation. 
Good (requires re-design but main 
mechanism not affected) 
Conveyor 
Promotes friction and 
thus mobility on belt 
Material may be more prone to 
rolling, less power required for belt 
operation 
Good (may be more efficient than 
on Earth, may require design 
adjustments to stop material rolling) 
Vibrating Screen 
Feed and discharge, 
Used as driving force 
Significantly lower screen 
efficiency, higher likelihood of dust 
evolution 
Poor (requires significant 
alterations to current designs) 
Mill 
(Rod, Ball, SAG) 
Feed and discharge, 
primary driving force 
Mills would need to be designed 
significantly larger for similar 
efficiency and throughput 
V. Poor (requires alternate 
technology) 
Hydrocyclone 
Aids separation 
efficiency 
Orientation of cyclone less 
important, will require alterations to 
operating pressure/flowrate 
Good (minor adjustments may be 
beneficial) 
 
Less common in industry, crushing and grinding methods such as vertical shaft impactors, that 
use centrifugal force as the main driving mechanism may be usable; however, even these impact 
crushers use gravity as a feed mechanism and require the regular replacement of wear parts. Similarly 
the use of electric pulse fragmentation [103] may find use in extra-terrestrial comminution processes, 
gravity would not affect this equipment beyond feed and discharge however this technology is itself at 
a low TRL, requiring further development. 
Dust generation and supply chain costs are critically important but can be accounted for with 
significant planning. Like gravity, the lack of water availability is a significant hurdle for the use of 
classical comminution flowsheets on the Moon. The lack of available water renders wet comminution 
techniques, (i.e., grinding processes using a ball mill and hydrocyclones for classification) unpractical. 
This requires the development of non-standard grinding techniques if traditional particle sizes are still 
required for the beneficiation and reduction of the lunar ores. When considering the use of traditional 
comminution methods, it is also important to consider the power requirements usually associated with 
the comminution circuit. On average ~29% of total electrical energy consumption for modern mining 
and processing operations is due to the comminution circuit alone [104]. The minimisation of electrical 
energy use is beneficial on the Moon due to the mass and subsequent launch cost associated with large 
power generators. Economic operation in space, and specifically on the Moon, will significantly favour 
the use of more energy efficient equipment. 

In terrestrial operations the primary concern of the comminution circuit is that of particle 
liberation [102]. When considering the processing of lunar regolith material, that has a naturally 
occurring P80 of 257µm (see Figure 2), most large mineral grains present in the lunar regolith are 
already liberated to some degree [16]. The main contender for non-liberated particles is that of the 
prevalent glasses and agglutinates formed by meteor impacts. The difficulty in deciding how to 
processes these particles is that the glass composition very closely matches that of the bulk regolith 
[16], and there are no grains within that can be liberated further. With a glass and agglutinate 
composition of between 10 and 60 percent [16], the instant rejection of this portion of the regolith due 
to its glassy and/or agglutinated form will result in a targeted rejection of 10 to 60 percent of the targeted 
elements. This will not directly affect a mineral concentrate grade but will significantly affect target 
metal recoveries when calculated from bulk feed composition. The inability to liberate minerals from 
the glassy fraction of the regolith, and the existing particle size of the natural regolith call into question 
the necessity of operating a comminution circuit at all. 
An argument worth consideration is that of eliminating the comminution circuit from lunar 
operations entirely. The average particle size of the lunar regolith is already akin to that attained by 
standard comminution processes, with a large proportion falling into the category of 'fines' (<20 µm) 
that is historically a hinderance to standard mineral processing operations [102]. Similarly, 
comminution circuits are often the cause of significant dust generation, which in a low gravity 
environment and with the high susceptibility of the regolith to static charging will result in adverse 
operating conditions. Using classification equipment such as the vibrating classifier proposed by 
Kawamoto [105], an electrostatic travelling wave as suggested by Adachi et al. [106], or a centrifugal 
sieve as demonstrated by Wilkinson [107], it may be beneficial to remove large particles/rocks, 
selectively sinter the fines into usable sizes, and develop beneficiation and metal reduction processes 
that can use slightly larger particle sizes as a feed material. The elimination of the bulk of the 
comminution circuit in a mineral processing operation would significantly reduce the energy 
requirements of the process, eliminate a number of wear parts that would need regular 
replacement/maintenance with current technologies, and simplify the plant schematic increasing 
economic viability and the potential for plant automation. The development of usable comminution 
equipment is still required for mining operations targeting bedrock and any potential mineralised areas 
found within, but for initial processing endeavours targeting regolith material as a feedstock, the 
complete elimination of a classical comminution circuit and replacement with basic particle size 
classification has enough incentives that it is worth detailed investigation and cost benefit analysis. 
 
 

Beneficiation 
The second major step in a mineral processing operation is the beneficiation of the (usually) 
comminuted material. Beneficiation processes result in one or more concentrate streams, and a gangue 
or waste material stream [102]. The primary concerns regarding the conversion of terrestrial 
beneficiation processes for use on the lunar surface are water availability, supply chain costs, gravity, 
and pressure. The effect of these altered conditions on traditional beneficiation equipment can be seen 
in Table 7, a usability assessment has again been given to each equipment type. 
Static gravity concentration or separation techniques (classic jigs, tabling, etc.) suffer heavily in 
lunar conditions as they rely on gravity as the main separation mechanism. Equation 1 shows the 
acceleration (dx/dt) of a mineral particle with density 𝜌𝜌𝑠𝑠 in a fluid with density 𝜌𝜌𝑓𝑓, in a gravitational 
field (g) [108]. Since separation efficiency in static gravity concentration techniques is directly related 
to the difference in acceleration between particles, a lowering of the gravitational field (g) will 
significantly reduce this separation efficiency. 
 
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑= ൬ρ𝑠𝑠−ρ𝑓𝑓
ρ𝑠𝑠
൰g 
1 
 
The beneficiation processes that are more strongly affected by this reduction in gravity tend to 
have centrifugal variants that could be used instead. Centrifugal variants of equipment for flotation 
[109], dense media separation [110], and gravity separation [111] have all been studied in depth for 
terrestrial use. Equipment such as gravity spirals lie in a grey zone as they use gravity as an essential 
motive mechanism, but the actual separation achieved is due to the generated centrifugal force. 
Secondary equipment such as slurry pumps and storage tanks actually benefit from the lower gravity as 
less energy is required for overcoming head pressures and particle settling respectively. For 
beneficiation, the altered gravity conditions do not seem to pose an insurmountable issue. Of 
significantly greater concern is the heavy reliance of most traditional beneficiation processes on the 
access to and use of water. 
Water is used in the majority of terrestrial mineral processing plants from the grinding stage of 
comminution onwards [1, 2]. On the lunar surface the use of water, and hydrometallurgical processes 
in general, has several issues. The significant lack of water available and the cost of said water in 
cislunar space is prohibitive. Similarly, these hydrometallurgical processes often utilise chemical 
reagents (acids, modifiers, collectors, dense media, frothers, dispersants, flocculants, etc.) which for 
ongoing operations represent significant re-supply costs. An added complication explored above is the 
requirement for artificial pressurisation for any processes including liquids. Due to these combined 
factors, the use of hydrometallurgical processes on the Moon is likely to be uneconomical. This leaves 
only the options of dry beneficiation, processes such as electrostatic separation, magnetic separation, 
particle sorting, and dry gravity separation techniques. These processes are often associated with 
mineral sands type processing facilities. 
The need for dry beneficiation techniques has not been ignored by the ISRU community. Rasera 
et al. [112] in a recent thorough review of lunar beneficiation techniques covered solely dry methods of 
beneficiation. Significant research has gone into the dry beneficiation of lunar regolith, Rasera et al. 
[112] noted that most lunar specific research to date has been focussed on the concentration of ilmenite 
(FeTiO3), and has ignored the <50µm size fraction of the material. The majority of this research has 
been into electrostatic separation [53, 106, 113-123], with some into magnetic separation [124-127] and 
size sorting [107]. Of these, seven test series have been conducted on returned lunar samples #64421 
[125], #10058 [124], #71055 [124], #10084 [53, 120], #14163 [114], and #70051 [114]. With such a 
comprehensive study of ilmenite concentration, it will be beneficial for future research to consider the 
concentration of other prevalent minerals on the lunar surface such as anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8). 

Table 7 -Traditional Beneficiation Equipment Considerations for Lunar Use 
Equipment type 
Effect of gravity 
Lack of water 
Ambient pressure 
Supply chain 
(wear parts, reagents) 
Usability assessment 
Flotation 
Will lower buoyancy force 
significantly lowering concentration 
efficiency 
Cannot operate without 
water. 
 
Uses water, requires 
artificial pressurisation. 
Large amounts of reagent 
required (non-recoverable). 
V.Poor (Primary separation mechanic 
severely impacted, requires water, 
large supply chain costs) 
Centrifugal 
Flotation 
Gravity replaced with Centrifugal 
force. Less pressure required to 
counteract natural gravity 
Poor (requires water, large supply 
chain costs) 
Traditional 
Gravity 
(Tables, Jigs, etc.) 
Separation efficiency significantly 
impacted 
Water fluidised and 
pneumatic variants need 
artificial pressurisation.  
Wear parts require regular 
replacement (abrasion) 
V.Poor (Primary separation mechanic 
severely impacted, require water, 
requires alternate technology) 
Centrifugal 
Gravity 
Separators 
Gravity replaced with Centrifugal 
force. Material discharge gravity 
driven, so slower in low g 
Good (Requires re-design, wear parts a 
consideration) 
Magnetic 
Separator 
Material flow caused by gravity; 
separation not affected but re-
design required. 
Waterless operation 
variants 
Particle trajectory 
alteration due to lack of 
air resistance. 
V.Good (Requires re-design, wear 
parts a consideration) 
Electrostatic 
Separator 
Does not require water. 
V.Good (Requires re-design, wear 
parts a consideration) 
Sorting Machines 
Good (will require re-design, only 
applicable to course material) 
Dense Media 
Separator 
Will lower buoyancy force 
significantly lowering concentration 
efficiency 
Uses liquid media, 
requires artificial 
pressurisation. 
Requires dense media reagent 
replenishment. 
V. Poor (Gravity affects primary 
concentration, significant reagent 
replenishment required) 
 
Electrostatic and magnetic separation have significant promise for lunar beneficiation activities. For electrostatic beneficiation, the lack of ambient gas, 
in addition to the air resistance effects, will impact the charging properties of particles [53, 118]. The design of the charging mechanism for this process will 
need detailed scrutiny, this is in addition to including the effect of gravity on the process which, with the exception of Quinn et al. [113], has had very little 
study to date. Another potential issue for the use of electrostatic separation is the nature of the lunar environment to naturally statically charge the regolith [79]. 
Pre-charged regolith, whilst already being a massive issue in its own right [84, 128], could render separation techniques based on artificial charge acquisition 
useless; as such, de-charging of the bulk regolith prior to feed into an electrostatic separator would be essential. 

Along with electrostatic and magnetic separation techniques, sorting machines pose an 
interesting beneficiation (or classification) prospect. One property of the regolith that significantly 
affects the potential use of sorting machines, but also other dry beneficiation techniques, is that of the 
particle size. Figure 5 shows the accepted feed particle sizes of 27 beneficiation techniques separated 
into wet (upper) and dry (lower) methods. Note that the minimum feed size for the dry processing 
techniques is 70 µm, with the exception of dry cyclones (50 µm), this is around the average P50 of the 
regolith material from the data set presented in Figure 2 (69 µm). This means that using these existing 
dry processing techniques, a classification stage that selectively removed 50% of the regolith material 
(the fines <70 µm) before beneficiation would be required. It is also interesting to note that some of 
these dry techniques still require fluidisation using air and as such would still need artificial 
pressurisation as covered in Table 7. 
 
Figure 5 – Wet (upper) vs. Dry (lower) processing options and their accepted feed particle sizes, reproduced from 
Nunna et al.  [129] 
In addition to particle size, the existence of the lunar regolith in a much more modally 
homogenous state (i.e. with fewer liberated minerals) than most beneficiation feedstocks on Earth, 
significantly reduces the effectivity of a beneficiation process. Predicated on the separation of material 
based on the different physical and chemical characteristics of the target and gangue minerals, the large 
amount of glass present in the regolith, representing a mixed amorphous silicate-type material, render 
traditional beneficiation techniques unusable. Even newer proposed techniques such as electrophoresis 
for mineral separation [130, 131] suffer from the large percentage of amorphous material present. In a 
similar argument as was made for the comminution circuit; the elimination of the beneficiation stage of 
processing warrants detailed consideration. This would need to be the topic of an entire study, however 
it is not unreasonable to assume that the added process complexity inherent in a beneficiation process, 
the required up-mass, subsequent increase in CAPEX, increase in process complexity and thus difficulty 
in automation, and the inability of a beneficiation stage to consistently process the majority of the 
regolith either due to particle size or composition, result in the elimination of this circuit being a 
potentially economically incentivised endeavour. Such eliminations would require the modification of 
current metal reduction technologies to be able to deal with significantly lower target material feed 

grades. The development of a metal reduction technology that can accept un-beneficiated feed material 
at non-standard sizes certainly has some significant benefits over current mineral processing and 
reduction flow sheets. 
Metal extraction 
Metal extraction, or the reduction of oxides, is the final step in the production of usable metal 
resources. Historically, the focus of the ISRU community has been on the production of oxygen rather 
than metals [5, 6, 30, 132, 133], however, the by-product of the production of oxygen from an oxide is 
usually a metal alloy. The current work will focus specifically on metal production rather than oxygen 
production. That said, the majority of ISRU related research referenced here has treated the metal 
produced as a by-product rather than a target resource. Despite the focus that will be given to metal 
extraction in the current work, the significant increase in economically viability of a process if the 
oxygen liberated in the oxide reduction is collected as a saleable/usable product cannot be understated. 
The primary concerns in the evaluation of metal reduction processes for use on the Moon are 
reagent usage and supply chain costs, energy requirements, feedstock availability, and process 
complexity. The analysis presented in the current work aims to ignore the TRL of the processes 
mentioned herein, instead the potential of each process based on the above-mentioned concerns will be 
analysed. A detailed review of the historical work that has been conducted in this field is listed in Table 
8. The table details each process and separates studies based on target resources, temperatures of 
operation, and in some cases reagent architectures. A generalised usability assessment has again been 
provided for each general process. The authors would like to note that the studies and subsequent 
conditions and reagent requirements referenced in Table 8 represent a compilation of all published 
research in this area and the quality of the processes presented in the cited literature. Some studies 
referenced are preliminary studies and/or lack significant details but are included in the interest of 
portraying all the historical work in this area. 
The majority of work in this area has focused on the design of individual reactors rather than 
considering an end-to-end process as a whole. With this said, the testing of individual reactors and 
extraction techniques are important for inclusion of these extraction processes in a larger mining 
flowsheet. As can be seen in Table 8 many candidate processes for oxygen production have been 
proposed. Of these, due to their high TRL, carbothermal reduction, hydrogen reduction, and molten 
oxide electrolysis (MOE) have been identified as prime candidates for experimental testing on the Moon 
during the Artemis program [30, 134]. 
Three broad categories of reduction can be seen in Table 8. Reduction using chemical potential 
energy, reduction using electrical energy, and reduction using thermal energy. Each of these categories 
will be discussed in general as each have advantages and disadvantages. Detailed descriptions of each 
process can be found in the references provided in Table 8.

Table 8 - Possible metal extraction techniques for lunar use to date 
Process 
Research Target 
Resource 
Useful By-
products 
Refs 
Condition 
Requirements 
Reagents/Required wear parts 
Overall assessment 
Carbothermal 
Reduction 
Oxygen 
Oxygen 
 
Oxygen 
Fe 
Fe, TiC, 
FexSi, P 
Fe, SiC/SiO 
[135]  
[136-139] 
 
[140-145] 
<1100 °C 
>1200 °C 
 
>1600 °C 
Carbon (Solid, Methane, CO) 
Medium process complexity, regents 
required, requires artificial atmosphere 
Hydrogen 
Reduction of 
Ilmenite 
Oxygen 
 
 
Fe 
 
 
[27, 47, 146-156] 
 
700-1100 °C 
 
 
Hydrogen 
Medium process complexity, regents 
required, requires artificial atmosphere, 
limited feedstock availability 
Molten Oxide 
Electrolysis 
(MOE) 
Oxygen 
 
Oxygen, Al-Si 
Alloy 
Al, Si, Fe, 
Ti Alloy 
[142, 157-162] 
 
[163] 
850C-1250 °C 
 
960-980 °C 
 
Electrolyte (CaCl2 - CaO, or SiO2 - B2O3 
– Na2O, LiF, CaF2, MgF2, Na2O, NaBO4, 
Na3PO4, Na5P3O10, NaF – AlF3) 
Anodes 
Medium process complexity, regents 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, high electrical load 
Molten Regolith 
Electrolysis 
(MRE) 
Oxygen 
Fe, Si 
[145, 158, 164-174] 
 
1300-2000 °C 
Anodes 
Medium process complexity, electrodes 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, high electrical load 
Solid 
Electrolysis 
Oxygen 
 
 
Mixed 
Metal Alloy 
 
[175, 176] 
 
 
 
900-950 °C 
 
 
Electrolyte (CaCl2 – CaO, AlF3) 
Anodes 
Medium process complexity, regents 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, lower electrical load 
Thermal 
Decomposition 
* 
 
 
 
(& Selective 
Ionisation) 
Oxygen 
Entire Composition 
Fe, Na, K 
Oxygen 
Oxygen 
Oxygen, Si 
 
Oxygen 
Fe, 
Oxygen 
 
 
 
Metals 
[177-187] 
[188] 
[62] 
[189] 
[190] 
[155, 191] 
 
[172, 185, 192, 193] 
1200-2000 °C 
900-1800 °C 
900-1200 °C 
1427-1827 °C 
2230 °C 
2700 °C 
 
>7000 °C 
 
 
 
 
Hydrogen 
Medium process complexity, no regents 
required, low electrical load (requires 
access to sunlight) 
Ionic Liquid & 
Aqueous 
Electrolysis 
Oxygen, Metals 
 
[194-196] 
0-300 °C 
Ionic Liquids**, 
Water, Electrodes, Sulfuric acid or 
Phosphoric acid in some cases. 
High process complexity, regents 
required, requires artificial atmosphere, 
medium electrical load 
Aluminothermic 
Reduction 
Oxygen, Fe, Ti, Si, 
and Al, Mg 
Oxygen, Si, Al, Ca 
 
 
 
[155, 197] 
 
[198, 199] 
900-1000 °C 
 
? 
Conducted in electrolyte (NaF, AlF) 
Anode (Fe0.58-Ni0.42) 
Initial reactant (Al) 
High process complexity, regents 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, high electrical load 
Lithium 
Reduction 
Oxygen 
Mixed 
Metal Alloy 
[200, 201] 
900 °C 
 
Electrodes (FeSi2Lix, Pt, 
La0.89Sr0.1MnO3), Reactant (LiF, LiCl or 
Li2O), Electrolyte (ZrO2), Catholyte 
(La0.89Sr0.1MnO3) 
High process complexity, regents 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, high electrical load 

Acid Reduction 
Oxygen 
Fe 
[142, 143, 145, 162, 
202] 
20-110 °C 
HF, H2SO4 
High process complexity, regents 
required, requires artificial atmosphere, 
limited feedstock availability**** 
Fluorine 
Reduction 
Oxygen 
Mixed 
Metal Alloy 
(Si, Fe, Ti, 
Al, etc..), 
CaO, MgO 
[203-207] 
[172] 
500-750 °C  
900 °C 
KF, LiF, NaF, or HF 
V. High process complexity, regents 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, high electrical load 
Bio-Reduction 
Fe(II) 
N/A 
[208-210] 
20-40 °C 
Bacteria, Water, Defined Minimal 
Medium *** 
High process complexity, regents 
required, requires artificial atmosphere, 
needs high precision temperature 
control 
Carbochlorinati
on 
Oxygen, Al, Fe, 
TiO2, CaO, 
SiO2 
[144, 172, 198] 
675-770 °C 
Cl (g), Carbon (s), Hydrogen and /or 
water 
High process complexity, regents 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, medium electrical load, 
specific feedstock required 
Calcium 
Reduction 
Oxygen 
Metal Alloy 
[211] 
900-1000 °C 
Molten Salt (CaO/CaCl2) 
Electrodes 
Initial reactant (Ca) 
High process complexity, regents 
required, requires partial artificial 
atmosphere, high electrical load 
* Volatile extraction methods (such as water ice evaporation [28, 32]) have been excluded from the current review as they don’t cover temperature ranges relevant for metal extraction. 
** 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate, 1-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate, 1-methylpyrrolidinium hydrogen sulfate,  3-[butyl-4-sulfonic acid]-1-methylimidazolium hydrogen 
sulfate, 3-[butyl-4-sulfonic acid]-1-methylimidazolium triflate [196]. 
*** NaCl, sodium 4(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulphonic acid, NaOH, NH4Cl, KCl, NaH2PO4·2H2O, and trace mineral supplement [208]. 
**** H2SO4 processing only targeted Ilmenite as an Fe/O2 source [202] 

Chemical Reduction 
Chemical reduction techniques utilise the preferential reaction of an outside reagent with an oxide 
to form metal and a secondary oxide. For example, Equation 2 shows the hydrogen reduction of iron 
monoxide forming Fe metal and water.  
 
 
𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹(𝑠𝑠) + 𝐻𝐻2(𝑔𝑔)  → 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 (𝑠𝑠) + 𝐻𝐻2𝑂𝑂(𝑔𝑔) 
2 
 
Chemical reduction processes have been used for a long time [1] and are generally well 
understood. This has led to a relatively simple conversion of these processes for use in extra-terrestrial 
applications. However, the high TRL of processes that inherently comes from the conversion of well-
established industry applications does not infer that their use in an extra-terrestrial setting is favoured. 
One of the inherently unavoidable issues with chemical reduction methods for lunar use is the 
supply chain costs associated with reagent use. Whilst supply chain cost are important in terrestrial 
industry, very rarely are they so prohibitive as to result in the dismissal of a certain reduction mechanism 
from a process flowsheet. On the Moon this is not the case. Some processes such as hydrogen reduction 
can theoretically be operated with a lunar hydrogen source, however this lunar derived hydrogen, as 
mentioned previously in the case of water, is a valuable resource in its own right. Other processes such 
as carbothermal reduction, ionic liquid extraction, lithium reduction, acid reduction, calcium reduction, 
fluorine reduction, and carbochlorination, all currently require terrestrially derived reagents. This issue 
of supply chain costs is not ignored in the literature, all processes described here have reagent recycling 
built into the proposed process, however, the question of efficiency at industrial scales requires 
investigation. Even sub 1% losses in laboratory scale tests will result in prohibitive reagent resupply 
costs after upscaling. A secondary issue with regent recycling is the inherent process complexity added 
by this pursuit. The recycling of reagents is achieved through the electrolysis of the secondary oxide 
described in Equation 2 (H2O, CO2, KF, Al2O3, etc.). The use of electrolysis for reagent recycling 
undermines one of the key advantages of chemical reduction methods on Earth, namely the electrical 
energy requirements. 
Several chemical reduction processes (Hydrothermal, Carbothermal, Flourine, and 
Carbochlorination) also rely on a solid-gas interaction necessitating that the reaction take place in an 
artificially pressurised atmosphere. Metal reduction using a gaseous reagent cannot be conducted under 
significantly evacuated conditions due to the pressure of that reagent required for reduction [55]. 
Similarly, the processes that occur in aqueous environments (Acid reduction, Ionic liquids, and bio-
reduction), also require artificial pressurisation to maintain the process reagents in the liquid state. High 
temperature liquid-phase reactions like those used in metallothermic reduction using lithium, calcium, 
and aluminium, can theoretically operate in high vacuum conditions however the gradual evaporation 
of the liquid or slag will result in material losses. 
Processes such as the carbochlorination of anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8) and the hydrogen reduction of 
ilmenite (FeTiO3), the latter being more popular in the literature, also suffer from the issue of feedstock 
availability. The beneficiation of bulk regolith would be required to produce a concentrate stream of the 
specific mineral feedstock. The beneficiation of the feedstock also warrants scrutiny when considering 
the effect of gravity and regolith particle size on the reaction kinetics of solid-gas reaction mechanisms. 
Grill et al. [212] analysed the effect of particle sizes on the fluidisation characteristics of lunar regolith 
simulants, noting that different simulants behaved differently. Two of the simulants (EAC-1 and TUBS-
M) had a tendency to experience de-fluidisation, something that was not seen in another simulant 
material (JSC-1A). Grill et al. [212] note that future research using these reactors needs to make sure 
the simulants used in the research match the desired lunar feedstock to ensure they are designed properly 

for operation on the Moon. They conclude that the effect of low gravity conditions is an important next 
step in the validation of the use of a fluidised bed reactor on the lunar surface.  
Of the processes categorised here under ‘chemical reduction pathways’, bio-reduction is one of 
the more novel and less well studied. The use of biological agents within a mining or metal extraction 
flowsheet is not common even terrestrially. Whilst summarising NASA’s Lunar Regolith Biomining 
workshop, held in 2007, Dalton et al. [213] concluded that “The proposed extraction of O from FeO by 
cyanobacteria is far beyond the current reach of bioengineering technology”. Alternative bacteria such 
as genetically edited E.Coli strands have since been proposed [209, 210], however these processes still 
encounter the large issues of precise condition maintenance, extra reagent requirements, and 
fundamentally, the lack a useful bulk product. 
Chemical reduction methods, whilst well understood and easily modifiable for lunar use resulting 
in high TRL levels, are not ideal metal reduction pathways in a lunar context. With the exception of 
hydrogen reduction, which only uses Fe-bearing minerals as a feedstock (predominantly ilmenite), and 
carbothermal reduction using carbon monoxide (the solid-gas reaction variant of the process), the 
chemical reduction methods are schematically complex processes, that inevitably result in larger supply 
chain costs over time. There is also a significant lack in the literature addressing known process specific 
issues such as hydrogen embrittlement of metals and loss through permeation [214]. Whilst some of 
these processes will be used on the lunar surface in coming years [134], more attention should be given 
to the understanding and development of processes that are more optimized for off-Earth use. 
Electrochemical Reduction 
Electrochemical reduction processes reduce oxides by passing electrical energy through 
electrodes and an electrolyte containing or composed of the feedstock material. In an electrolytic 
process, two separate chemical reactions happen simultaneously, one at each electrode. These reactions 
are referred to as the anodic reaction (where oxidation occurs) and cathodic reaction (where reduction 
occurs). Equation 3 is a generalized equation for the electrolysis of a metal oxide that combines the 
anodic and cathodic reactions into a single equation. 
 
2𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀(𝑙𝑙)  → 2𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀(𝑙𝑙)  + 𝑂𝑂2(𝑔𝑔) 
3 
 
There are three main categories of electrochemical reduction pathways that have been 
investigated in the literature. Molten Oxide Electrolysis (MOE), which involves the electrolysis of 
regolith that has been dissolved in a molten salt electrolyte. Molten Regolith Electrolysis (MRE), which 
omits the molten salts in favour of using molten regolith as the electrolyte; and Solid Electrolysis, which 
operates at lower temperatures and uses sintered regolith as the cathode for the cell . 
Both MOE and MRE avoid the issues of feedstock particle size and modal composition by 
working with the regolith material in a molten state. This is very beneficial when considering the 
arguments presented above in regard to the elimination of the comminution and beneficiation stages of 
mineral processing. MOE and Solid Electrolysis both still use an electrolyte material that would fall 
under the category of a required reagent and the detrimental effect of re-supply logistics discussed 
previously. Solid electrolysis does however have the added benefit of operating at significantly lower 
temperatures (900 to 950 °C versus the 1300 to 2000 °C of MRE). 
Of the three variants, MRE and Solid Electrolysis are preferable. Whilst the use of an electrolyte 
is not ideal, the added benefit of the lower operating temperature for the Solid Electrolysis has a 
potential to lower the total energy requirements which may be beneficial in a lunar context. Solid 
Electrolysis also has the potential to reduce all the oxides present in the regolith creating a metal alloy 
with an oxygen extraction efficiency of close to 100% [215]. The mixed metal alloy product is not ideal, 
however, Lomax et al. [215] in their demonstration of Solid Electrolysis do suggest to novel approach 

of designing metal alloys based on prior beneficiation of the feedstock. Power consumption in general 
for these processes is one of the more potentially limiting issues presented by the task of upscaling to 
industrial sizes. The major advantage of MRE over Solid electrolysis is that of the lack of an externally 
sourced electrolyte. MRE uses the regoltih feed material itself as an electrolyte in the reduction process, 
this comes with the added benefit that solid electrolyte (regolith) can be used to contain the melt as 
opposed to other insulating materials that are required for MOE and Solid Electrolysis. 
Regardless of which electrochemical reduction method is used, all three variants require the use 
of an inert anode. The pursuit of materials that can be used for such a purpose has been ongoing. 
Information on the significant amount of work that has been put into the development of ‘inert’ anode 
materials for oxide electrolysis can be found elsewhere [163, 197, 216-220]. With current technologies, 
whilst corrosion rates are extremely low, 7.7mm/year for iridium being considered ‘inert’ [220], 
replacement of the anodes would still be required. 
Electrochemical reduction has several benefits over chemical reduction methods. Primarily, the 
process complexity tends to be lower, potentially allowing for much easier automation of the processes. 
Also, of significance, especially in the case of MRE, the lack of reagents and subsequent re-supply 
logistics is very appealing. The electrical loads required for these processes are concerning but not 
insurmountable with increased CAPEX (preferable to the increased operational costs involved with 
reagent re-supply). Since the reduction is taking place within a molten bath, electrochemical reduction 
methods do not require beneficiated feedstock and are unaffected by the modal composition and particle 
size of the feed material. Geochemical composition of the feed material is important in terms of slag 
acidity/basicity and its effects on cell operation and electrical efficiency. However, these variations are 
regional and would need to be considered regardless of the reduction method employed. MRE has been 
identified as one of the primary candidates for ISRU technology by NASA [134]. 
Thermal Reduction 
Thermal reduction, historically also referred to as ‘Pyrolysis’ in the literature, involves the 
reduction of oxides at high temperatures due to thermal dissociation. 
 
2𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀(𝑠𝑠,𝑙𝑙)  → 2𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀(𝑙𝑙,𝑔𝑔)  + 𝑂𝑂2 (𝑔𝑔) 
4 
 
This reduction method is not used terrestrially for bulk metal production due to the prohibitive 
energy requirements of feed material vaporisation. However, in a lunar context, the increased access to 
higher flux solar radiation and the longer day/night cycle allows for the use of concentrated solar energy 
as the heat source for prolonged periods of time. The temperature requirements for thermal dissociation 
vary from 900 to 2700 °C depending on the target oxide and desired reaction rate. Unlike MRE and 
solid electrolysis, not every oxide can be reduced using this process, some oxides, such as SiO2 and 
TiO2 form sub-oxides (SiO, TixOy) instead of fully reducing under high temperature environments. 
The recovery of metal from a thermal dissociation reaction is predicated on the deposition of the 
metal vapour created in some manner of cold trap. This deposition can be complicated by the back 
reaction of oxygen gas (formed from the oxide dissociation) with the deposited metal. Based on 
thermodynamic analysis of oxygen production from a lunar oxide source, Senior [178] concluded that 
thermal dissociation processes should not exceed 1727 °C as at this temperature the partial pressure of 
monoatomic oxygen increases over that of oxygen gas in the product. Monoatomic oxygen will react 
much more readily with metals than will oxygen gas. 
Despite its low TRL, thermal dissociation has a number of advantages over traditional metal 
reduction processes, at least in the context of extra-terrestrial usage. The process requires no reagents 
or significant wear parts that would require re-supply from terrestrial sources. The majority of the 
energy requirement for the process can be obtained using concentrated solar flux rather than electrical 

energy. Whilst increased surface area will increase the kinetics of dissociation, the process theoretically 
operates on any feedstock regardless of geochemical composition and modality, making it flexible in 
terms of applicability to other extra-terrestrial feedstocks. And schematically the process is relatively 
un-complicated. The complexity of recovering usable metal from the cold trap(s) requires significant 
study. With a fractional deposition method, similar to that used in fractional distillation on Earth, metal 
vapours can be condensed and recovered individually, but the practicality of this method requires 
significant research [62, 183].  
A further potential benefit to thermal dissociation is the effect of the ambient vacuum on oxide 
stability as discussed above. The ambient pressure conditions in space, and on the Moon, whilst not 
helping the kinetics of thermal dissociation, have the potential to significantly reduce the energy 
requirements of the process. The use of the natural lunar vacuum to replace the pumping equipment 
usually required for vacuum metallurgical processes on Earth reduces the launch mass of the process. 
This is the only metal reduction process proposed to date that actively uses the ambient vacuum 
conditions on the Moon in a beneficial manner. The significant energy reduction requirements for 
thermal dissociation in vacuum as opposed to at 1 atm has been predicted using thermodynamic 
modelling in previous work [62]. Similarly, Ellingham Diagrams generated at varying pressures to 
demonstrate this effect have been presented elsewhere [56]. Whilst the energy reduction for dissociation 
in vacuum is beneficial, the subsequent slower reaction kinetics require detailed investigation to 
determine the optimal combination of temperature and pressure for such a process. 
It is of note that in the current study, the processes involving selective ionisation [172, 185, 192, 
193] have also been included in the category of thermal dissociation. The selective ionisation process 
differs somewhat to standard thermal dissociation in that the reactor temperature is often well in excess 
of 7000 °C. The process uses the charge to mass ratio of the ions produced at such high temperatures 
to separate each atom individually in a charged field [185, 192], in theory resulting in a perfect split of 
the components of the oxide feed. Study in this field has been theoretical to date.  
The significant disadvantages of thermal decomposition as a metal reduction method are the 
kinetics of the reaction at lower temperatures, and the inability to operate without significant electrical 
loads during the lunar night. It is also important to note that whilst concentrated solar energy can be 
used for the primary reduction mechanism, electrical energy will presumably still be required for the 
cooling of the deposition apparatus. Thermal dissociation as a technology is not advanced enough in 
TRL to be included in initial ISRU testwork in coming years, however, the combination of flexibility 
in process feedstock, lack of reagents, relatively low process complexity, and lower electrical energy 
requirements suggest that this technology, with further research, has the potential to become very 
prevalent in extra-terrestrial metal production operations in the future. 
Other considerations 
In addition to the primary reduction mechanisms discussed above, there are a number of other 
challenges that must be taken into account when considering operation on the lunar surface. These 
issues are not process critical in nature but will need to be considered in detail when more complete 
end-to-end processing operations are designed. Materials handling in terms of the wear rates of the 
equipment when moving the abrasive regolith material, the operability of the equipment in dusty and/or 
electrostatic conditions, the heating characteristics of the regolith material, are all topics that require 
detailed investigation. 
Some studies into this area have already been conducted, for example:  
• 
The flowability of regolith simulant materials in a hopper under various gravitational 
fields [221] 
• 
The microwave heating characteristics of regolith [222] 

• 
Heat transfer characteristics of lunar regolith and their effect on sintering [223] 
There are many more elements of a metal reduction operation that warrant detailed research and 
development before industrial scale facilities can be operated on the Moon. Whilst the increased access 
to real lunar regolith and the conditions present on the lunar surface that will be available in coming 
years will make research in this field significantly easier, there are still very large knowledge gaps that 
need to be addressed before viable industrial scale process plant designs and subsequent business 
models can be produced. Some of the more critical challenges will be the equipment design surrounding 
the processes described here. The design of high vacuum capable seals for reactors that require a 
pressurised atmosphere. The design of de-gassing chambers for the carbothermal and hydrogen 
reduction processes that successfully remove all the reagent gas from the reduced feed prior to 
discharge. Automated tapping mechanisms for processes like MRE that can reliably and safely 
discharge the metal produced. Reliable methods of heat management in high temperature reactors 
operating in vacuum conditions. 
Conclusions 
The technological advancement and research required for industrial scale ISRU activities 
targeting minerals other than ice and producing usable metallic products from the lunar regolith is 
immense. The challenging conditions on the Moon, the low gravity, ultra-high vacuum, intense solar 
irradiation, electrostatic susceptibility of the regolith, the cryogenic temperatures in shaded regions, and 
large supply chain costs, represent a challenging suite of considerations that need to be accounted for 
in the design of mineral processing and metal reduction facilities on the lunar surface. 
It has been argued here that the most promising generic flowsheet for a mineral extraction and 
metal reduction process will: eliminate the comminution circuit, replacing it with basic classification to 
moderate the particle size of the feed; eliminate beneficiation stages entirely; and utilise schematically 
simple reduction processes that minimise reagent requirements and can take un-beneficiated, 
uncomminuted regolith material as a feed source. The metal reduction processes identified as being 
most applicable to a lunar ISRU/SRU operation are, hydrogen and carbothermal reduction, MRE and 
solid electrolysis, and vacuum thermal dissociation. Of these, due to the lack of required reagents and 
subsequent supply chain costs, MRE and vacuum thermal dissociation have the most promise for long 
term industrial scale implementation. This implementation is subject to concentrated research efforts in 
these areas to increase TRL levels. 
Every aspect of a mineral processing and metal reduction process needs rigorous analysis and a 
targeted research effort to make the concept of industrial scale ISRU operation a viable option on the 
Moon. The current work has aimed to provide a thorough review of the relevant conditions on the Moon 
and their respective effects on potential future mineral processing and metal extraction operations, with 
the intent to help inform future studies in these areas. It is of note that a number of the considerations 
portrayed in the current work, especially in terms of the supply chain costs of transport from Earth, are 
only applicable until large scale resource processing in space can provide the required resources from 
off-Earth sources, at which time some processes that suffer heavily from the added cost of reagent 
resupply will be made significantly more viable. 
Following this detailed look at mineral processing and metal extraction processes on the lunar 
surface the following conclusions have been made: 
1. Terrestrial processing technologies take advantage of the ambient conditions on Earth; 
thus, it is incorrect to assume that modification of these technologies for use in space 
represents the optimal path to ISRU. 
2. It is economically beneficial to develop extraction and processing equipment that uses 
the natural lunar environmental factors advantageously within a process. 

3. A remotely controlled or fully automated processing facility is preferable for extra-
terrestrial processing operations both economically and when considering human safety. 
4. Lunar-based metal extraction operations will favour schematically simple, lightweight 
processing plants. 
5. For beneficiation and reduction processes, reagents should be eliminated wherever 
possible to minimise supply chain costs. 
6. The removal of the comminution and beneficiation circuits, and the development of more 
robust metal reduction processes that can accommodate un-comminuted and un-
beneficiated feed materials has significant merit. 
7. The most promising metal reduction processes for industrial scale SRU are MRE and 
vacuum thermal dissociation. 
8. There is a significant amount of research required in all aspects of the field of 
astrometallurgy to develop and optimise mineral processing and metal extraction 
technologies for use in space and on the Moon. 
 
 

References 
1. 
Rosenqvist, T., Principles of Extractive Metallurgy. 2nd rev. ed.. ed. 2004: Trondheim, Norway 
: Tapir Academic Press. 
2. 
Habashi, F., Principles of extractive metallurgy. Vol. 1. 1969, Boca Raton, Florida, United 
States: CRC Press. 
3. 
Wills, B.A. and J. Finch, Wills' mineral processing technology: an introduction to the practical 
aspects of ore treatment and mineral recovery. 2015: Butterworth-Heinemann. 
4. 
Haskin, L.A. Material Resources of the Moon. in Fourteenth Lunar and Planetary Science 
Conference. 1983. Houston, Texas: Lunar and Planetary Institute. 
5. 
Schlüter, L. and A. Cowley, Review of techniques for In-Situ oxygen extraction on the moon. 
Planetary and Space Science, 2020. 181: p. 104753. 
6. 
Taylor, L.A. and W.D. Carrier III, Oxygen production on the moon: An overview and 
evaluation, in Resources of near-earth space, M.S.M. John S. Lewis, and Mary L. Guerrieri, 
Editor. 1993, The University of Arizona Press: Tuscon, Arizona, USA. p. 69-108. 
7. 
Turkevich, A.L., Average chemical composition of the lunar surface. The Moon, 1973. 8(3): p. 
365-367. 
8. 
McKay, D.S., G. Heiken, A. Basu, G. Blanford, S. Simon, R. Reedy, B.M. French, and J. 
Papike, The lunar regolith, in Lunar sourcebook, D.T.V. Grant H. Heiken, Bevan M. French,, 
Editor. 1991, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, United Kingdom. p. 285-356. 
9. 
Hörz, F., R. Grieve, G. Heiken, P. Spudis, and A. Binder, Lunar surface processes, in Lunar 
sourcebook, D.T.V. Grant H. Heiken, Bevan M. French, Editor. 1991, Cambridge University 
Press: Cambridge, United Kingdom. p. 61-120. 
10. 
Lucey, P.G., D.T. Blewett, and B.L. Jolliff, Lunar iron and titanium abundance algorithms 
based on final processing of Clementine ultraviolet‐visible images. Journal of Geophysical 
Research: Planets, 2000. 105(E8): p. 20297-20305. 
11. 
Spudis, P., N. Zellner, J. Delano, D. Whittet, and B. Fessler. Petrologic mapping of the Moon: 
a new approach. in 33rd Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. 2002. Houston, Texas, 
USA. 
12. 
Duke, M.B., L.R. Gaddis, G.J. Taylor, and H.H. Schmitt, Development of the Moon. Reviews 
in mineralogy and geochemistry, 2006. 60(1): p. 597-655. 
13. 
Haskin, L. and P. Warren, Lunar chemistry. Lunar sourcebook, 1991. 4(4): p. 357-474. 
14. 
Taylor, G.J., P. Warren, G. Ryder, J. Delano, C. Pieters, and G. Lofgren, Lunar rocks, in Lunar 
sourcebook, D.T.V. Grant H. Heiken, Bevan M. French, , Editor. 1991, Cambridge University 
Press: Cambridge, United Kingdom. p. 183-284. 
15. 
Papike, J.J., G. Ryder, and C.K. Shearer, Lunar Samples. Reviews in Mineralogy and 
Geochemistry, 1998. 36: p. 5-01 to 5-234. 
16. 
Papike, J., S.B. Simon, and J. Laul, The lunar regolith: Chemistry, mineralogy, and petrology. 
Reviews of Geophysics, 1982. 20(4): p. 761-826. 
17. 
Ivanov, A.V., Volatiles in lunar regolith samples: A survey. Solar System Research, 2014. 
48(2): p. 113-129. 
18. 
Fegley Jr, B. and T.D. Swindle, Lunar volatiles: implications for lunar resource utilization, in 
Resources of near-Earth space, J. Lewis, M.S. Matthews, and M.L. Guerrieri, Editors. 1993, 
University of Arizona Press: Arizona USA. p. 367-426. 
19. 
Graf, J.C., Lunar soils grain size catalog, NASA, Editor. 1993: Washington DC, USA. p. 484. 
20. 
Laul, J., J. Papike, and S. Simon. The lunar regolith-Comparative studies of the Apollo and 
Luna sites. Chemistry of soils from Apollo 17, Luna 16, 20, and 24. in Lunar and Planetary 
Science Conference Proceedings. 1982. Houston, TX, USA: Pergamon Press. 
21. 
Simon, S.B., J. Papike, and J. Laul. The lunar regolith-Comparative studies of the Apollo and 
Luna sites. Petrology of soils from Apollo 17, Luna 16, 20, and 24. in Lunar and Planetary 
Science Conference, 12th. 1982. Houston, TX, USA: Pergamon Press. 
22. 
Laul, J. and J. Papike. The lunar regolith-comparative chemistry of the Apollo sites. in Lunar 
and Planetary Science Conference Proceedings. 1980. Houston, TX,: Pergamon Press. 

23. 
Labotka, T., M.J. Kempa, C. White, J. Papike, and J. Laul. The lunar regolith-Comparative 
petrology of the Apollo sites. in Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, 11th. 1980. Houston, 
TX: Pergamon Press. 
24. 
Li, S., P.G. Lucey, R.E. Milliken, P.O. Hayne, E. Fisher, J.-P. Williams, D.M. Hurley, and R.C. 
Elphic, Direct evidence of surface exposed water ice in the lunar polar regions. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 2018. 115(36): p. 8907-8912. 
25. 
Colaprete, A., P. Schultz, J. Heldmann, D. Wooden, M. Shirley, K. Ennico, B. Hermalyn, W. 
Marshall, A. Ricco, R.C. Elphic, D. Goldstein, D. Summy, G.D. Bart, E. Asphaug, D. 
Korycansky, D. Landis, and L. Sollitt, Detection of water in the LCROSS ejecta plume. Science 
(New York, N.Y.), 2010. 330(6003): p. 463. 
26. 
Hayne, P.O., O. Aharonson, and N. Schörghofer, Micro cold traps on the Moon. Nature 
Astronomy, 2020. 
27. 
Sargeant, H., F. Abernethy, M. Anand, S. Barber, S. Sheridan, I. Wright, and A. Morse. Water 
production from lunar simulants and samples: an in situ resource utilization demonstration. in 
51st Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. 2020. The Woodlands, Texas, USA: LPI. 
28. 
Kornuta, D., A. Abbud-Madrid, J. Atkinson, J. Barr, G. Barnhard, D. Bienhoff, B. Blair, V. 
Clark, J. Cyrus, B. Dewitt, C. Dreyer, B. Finger, J. Goff, K. Ho, L. Kelsey, J. Keravala, B. 
Kutter, P. Metzger, L. Montgomery, P. Morrison, C. Neal, E. Otto, G. Roesler, J. Schier, B. 
Seifert, G. Sowers, P. Spudis, M. Sundahl, K. Zacny, and G. Zhu, Commercial lunar propellant 
architecture: A collaborative study of lunar propellant production. REACH, 2019. 13: p. 
100026. 
29. 
Reiss, P., L. Grill, and S.J. Barber, Thermal extraction of volatiles from the lunar regolith 
simulant NU-LHT-2M: Preparations for in-situ analyses on the Moon. Planetary and Space 
Science, 2019. 175: p. 41-51. 
30. 
Sanders, G., D. Linne, J.E. Kleinhenz, L.A. Moore, and A.J. Paz. NASA Oxygen and Water 
Production Architectures for Early Reusable Lander. in Lunar ISRU Workshop. 2019. 
Colimbia, Maryland, USA: LPI. 
31. 
Carpenter, J., R. Fisackerly, and B. Houdou, Establishing lunar resource viability. Space 
Policy, 2016. 37: p. 52-57. 
32. 
Ethridge, E. and W. Kaukler. Microwave Extraction of Water from Lunar Regolith Simulant. 
2007. American Institute of Physics. 
33. 
Miller, T. and J. Herr. Green rocket propulsion by reaction of Al and Mg powders and water. 
in 40th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit. 2004. Fort 
Lauderdale, Florida, USA. 
34. 
Anand, M., I.A. Crawford, M. Balat-Pichelin, S. Abanades, W. Van Westrenen, G. Péraudeau, 
R. Jaumann, and W. Seboldt, A brief review of chemical and mineralogical resources on the 
Moon and likely initial in situ resource utilization (ISRU) applications. Planetary and Space 
Science, 2012. 74(1): p. 42-48. 
35. 
Crawford, I.A., Lunar resources: A review. Progress in Physical Geography, 2015. 39(2): p. 
137-167. 
36. 
Hepp, A.F., D.L. Linne, G.A. Landis, M.F. Wadel, and J.E. Colvin, Production and use of 
metals and oxygen for lunar propulsion. Journal of Propulsion and Power, 1994. 10(6): p. 834-
840. 
37. 
Naser, M.Z., Space-native construction materials for earth-independent and sustainable 
infrastructure. Acta Astronautica, 2019. 155: p. 264-273. 
38. 
Naser, M., Extraterrestrial Construction Materials. Progress in Materials Science, 2019. 105: 
p. 100577. 
39. 
Flournoy, D.M.a., Solar Power Satellites, ed. SpringerLink. 2012: New York, NY : Springer 
New York : Springer. 
40. 
Hidding, B., M. Pfitzner, D. Simone, and C. Bruno, Review of the potential of silanes as 
rocket/scramjet fuels. Acta Astronautica, 2008. 63(1-4): p. 379-388. 
41. 
Steinfeld, A., P. Kuhn, A. Reller, R. Palumbo, J. Murray, and Y. Tamaura, Solar-processed 
metals as clean energy carriers and water-splitters. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 
1998. 23(9): p. 767-774. 

42. 
Benaroya, H., S. Mottaghi, and Z. Porter, Magnesium as an ISRU-derived resource for lunar 
structures. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2012. 26(1): p. 152-159. 
43. 
Risha, G., T. Connell, R. Yetter, V. Yang, T. Wood, M. Pfeil, T. Pourpoint, and S. Son. 
Aluminum-ice (ALICE) propellants for hydrogen generation and propulsion. in 45th 
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit. 2009. Denver, Colorado, 
USA. 
44. 
Eggeman, T., Sodium and sodium alloys, in Kirk‐Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical 
Technology. 2007, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, New Jersey. 
45. 
Kotzé, J.P., T.W. von Backström, and P.J. Erens. NaK as a primary heat transfer fluid in 
thermal solar power installations. in Proceeding of 18th SolarPACES Conference. 2012. 
Marrakech, Morocco. 
46. 
Rasera, J.N., J.J. Cilliers, J.A. Lamamy, and K. Hadler, The beneficiation of lunar regolith for 
space resource utilisation: A review. Planetary and Space Science, 2020: p. 104879. 
47. 
Gibson, M.A. and C.W. Knudsen, Lunar oxygen production from ilmenite, in Lunar bases and 
space activities of the 21st century, W.W. Mendell, Editor. 1985, Lunar and PLanetary Institute: 
Houston, Texas. p. 543-550. 
48. 
Craig, L. Resource Modelling for Mining on the Moon, Mars and Asteroids. in AusIMM Future 
Mining Conference. 2019. Sydney, NSW, Australia: AusIMM. 
49. 
Stern, S.A., The lunar atmosphere: History, status, current problems, and context. Reviews of 
Geophysics, 1999. 37(4): p. 453-491. 
50. 
Vondrak, R.R., Creation of an artificial lunar atmosphere. Nature, 1974. 248(5450): p. 657-
659. 
51. 
Vondrak, R.R. Lunar base activities and the lunar environment. in The Second Conference on 
Lunar Bases and Space Activities of the 21st Century (1988). 1992. Houston, Texas, USA: 
NASA Conference Publication (1992). 
52. 
Johnson, R.D. and C.H. Holbrow, Chapter 5, Appendix J: Impact Upon Lunar Atmosphere, in 
Space settlements: A design study, R.D. Johnson and C.H. Holbrow, Editors. 1977, Scientific 
and Technical Information Office, NASA: Washington DC. p. 113-114. 
53. 
Agosto, W.N. Electrostatic concentration of lunar soil minerals. in Lunar bases and space 
activities of the 21st century. 1985. 
54. 
Sossi, P.A. and B. Fegley, Jr., Thermodynamics of Element Volatility and its Application to 
Planetary Processes. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 2018. 84(1): p. 393-459. 
55. 
Halmann, M., A. Frei, and A. Steinfeld, Vacuum Carbothermic Reduction of Al2O3, BeO, 
MgO-CaO, TiO2, ZrO2, HfO2 + ZrO2, SiO2, SiO2 + Fe2O3, and GeO2 to the Metals. A 
Thermodynamic Study. Mineral Processing and Extractive Metallurgy Review, 2011. 32(4): p. 
247-266. 
56. 
Shaw, M.G., G.A. Brooks, M.A. Rhamdhani, A.R. Duffy, and M.I. Pownceby, High Vacuum 
Metallurgy: Opportunities in Lunar Resource Processing, Unpublished Manuscript, in 
AusIMM Future Mining Conference. 2021: Perth, Western Australia. 
57. 
Bale, C.W., E. Bélisle, P. Chartrand, S. Decterov, G. Eriksson, A. Gheribi, K. Hack, I.-H. Jung, 
Y.-B. Kang, and J. Melançon, Reprint of: FactSage thermochemical software and databases, 
2010–2016. Calphad, 2016. 55: p. 1-19. 
58. 
Bale, C., E. Bélisle, P. Chartrand, S. Decterov, G. Eriksson, K. Hack, I.-H. Jung, Y.-B. Kang, 
J. Melançon, and A. Pelton, FactSage thermochemical software and databases—recent 
developments. Calphad, 2009. 33(2): p. 295-311. 
59. 
Bale, C.W., P. Chartrand, S. Degterov, G. Eriksson, K. Hack, R.B. Mahfoud, J. Melançon, A. 
Pelton, and S. Petersen, FactSage thermochemical software and databases. Calphad, 2002. 
26(2): p. 189-228. 
60. 
Kroll, W., Vacuum metallurgy: its characteristics and its scope. Vacuum, 1951. 1(3): p. 163-
184. 
61. 
Balomenos, E., D. Panias, and İ. Paspaliaris, Exergy Analysis of Metal Oxide Carbothemic 
Reduction under Vacuum–Sustainability prospects. International Journal of Thermodynamics, 
2012. 15(3): p. 141-148. 

62. 
Shaw, M.G., G.A. Brooks, M.A. Rhamdhani, A.R. Duffy, and M.I. Pownceby, Thermodynamic 
Modelling of Ultra-high Vacuum Thermal Decomposition for Lunar Resource Processing. 
Planetary and Space Science, 2021: p. 105272. 
63. 
Reese, R.L., G.Y. Chang, and D.L. Dupuy, The oscillation of the synodic period of the Moon: 
A ‘‘beating’’phenomenon. American Journal of Physics, 1989. 57(9): p. 802-807. 
64. 
Kaczmarzyk, M., M. Gawronski, and G. Piatkowski. Global database of direct solar radiation 
at the Moon’s surface for lunar engineering purposes. in E3S Web of Conferences. 2018. EDP 
Sciences. 
65. 
Johnson, L. Orbital space solar power option for a lunar village. in 10th IAA Symposium on 
the future of space exploration: towards space village and beyond. 2017. Torino, Italy. 
66. 
Elvis, M., T. Milligan, and A. Krolikowski, The peaks of eternal light: A near-term property 
issue on the moon. Space Policy, 2016. 38: p. 30-38. 
67. 
Gläser, P., J. Oberst, G. Neumann, E. Mazarico, E. Speyerer, and M. Robinson, Illumination 
conditions at the lunar poles: Implications for future exploration. Planetary and Space Science, 
2018. 162: p. 170-178. 
68. 
Vanoutryve, B., D. De Rosa, R. Fisackerly, B. Houdou, J. Carpenter, C. Philippe, A. Pradier, 
A. Jojaghaian, S. Espinasse, and B. Gardini. An analysis of illumination and communication 
conditions near lunar south pole based on Kaguya Data. in Proceedings of International 
Planetary Probe Workshop, Barcelona. 2010. 
69. 
Speyerer, E.J. and M.S. Robinson, Persistently illuminated regions at the lunar poles: Ideal 
sites for future exploration. Icarus, 2013. 222(1): p. 122-136. 
70. 
Henrickson, J.V. and A. Stoica. Reflector placement for providing near-continuous solar power 
to robots in Shackleton Crater. in 2017 IEEE Aerospace Conference. 2017. Big Sky, MT, USA: 
IEEE. 
71. 
Bussey, D.B.J., J.A. McGovern, P.D. Spudis, C.D. Neish, H. Noda, Y. Ishihara, and S.A. 
Sørensen, Illumination conditions of the south pole of the Moon derived using Kaguya 
topography. Icarus, 2010. 208(2): p. 558-564. 
72. 
Williams, J.P., D.A. Paige, B.T. Greenhagen, and E. Sefton-Nash, The global surface 
temperatures of the Moon as measured by the Diviner Lunar Radiometer Experiment. Icarus, 
2017. 283: p. 300-325. 
73. 
Orloff, R.W., Apollo by the numbers: a statistical reference. Vol. 4029. 2000, Washington, DC: 
NASA History Division, Office of Policy and Plans, . 
74. 
Sengupta, M., A.K. Sinha, and R.B. Iyer, Some problems of surface mining in the Arctic. 
International Journal of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Environment, 1990. 4(1): p. 1-5. 
75. 
Anderson, W., J. Hartenstine, K. Walker, and J. Farmer. Variable thermal conductance link for 
lunar landers and rovers. in 46th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & 
Exhibit. 2010. Nashville, TN. 
76. 
Honniball, C.I., P.G. Lucey, S. Li, S. Shenoy, T.M. Orlando, C.A. Hibbitts, D.M. Hurley, and 
W.M. Farrell, Molecular water detected on the sunlit Moon by SOFIA. Nature Astronomy, 
2020. 
77. 
Lavakumar, A., Phase diagrams, in Concepts in Physical Metallurgy. 2017, Morgan & 
Claypool Publishers: Ca, USA. p. 7-1 to 7-20. 
78. 
Colwell, J., S. Batiste, M. Horányi, S. Robertson, and S. Sture, Lunar surface: Dust dynamics 
and regolith mechanics. Reviews of Geophysics, 2007. 45(2). 
79. 
Li, L., Y. Zhang, B. Zhou, and Y. Feng, Dust levitation and transport over the surface of the 
Moon. Science China Earth Sciences, 2016. 59(10): p. 2053-2061. 
80. 
Gaier, J.R., The effects of lunar dust on EVA systems during the Apollo missions, NASA, Editor. 
2005: Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio. 
81. 
Linnarsson, D., J. Carpenter, B. Fubini, P. Gerde, L.L. Karlsson, D.J. Loftus, G.K. Prisk, U. 
Staufer, E.M. Tranfield, and W. van Westrenen, Toxicity of lunar dust. Planetary and Space 
Science, 2012. 74(1): p. 57-71. 
82. 
Taylor, L., H. Schmitt, W. Carrier, and M. Nakagawa. Lunar dust problem: From liability to 
asset. in 1st space exploration conference: continuing the voyage of discovery. 2005. Orlando, 
Florida, USA. 

83. 
Kawamoto, H., Electrostatic shield for lunar dust entering mechanical seals of lunar 
exploration equipment. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2014. 27(2): p. 354-358. 
84. 
Calle, C.I., C.R. Buhler, M.R. Johansen, M.D. Hogue, and S.J. Snyder, Active dust control and 
mitigation technology for lunar and Martian exploration. Acta Astronautica, 2011. 69(11): p. 
1082-1088. 
85. 
Sowers, G.F., The Business Case for Lunar Ice Mining. New Space, 2021. 
86. 
Jones, H. The recent large reduction in space launch cost. in 48th International Conference on 
Environmental Systems. 2018. Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States. 
87. 
Johnson-Freese, J., Build on the outer space treaty. Nature News, 2017. 550(7675): p. 182. 
88. 
Saydam, S., Extracting Off-Earth Resources, in Extracting Innovations: Mining, Energy, and 
Technological Change in the Digital Age, R.K.P. Martin J. Clifford, Saleem H. Ali, Tim A. 
Grice, Editor. 2018, CRC Press: Boca Raton. 
89. 
Aharonson, O., C.T. Russell, J.W. Head, M. Wieczorek, I. Garrick-Bethell, B.P. Weiss, D.E. 
Smith, K. Rowe, A. Grosz, and S. Amrusi, The science mission of SpaceIL’s Beresheet lander. 
Planetary and Space Science, 2020. 194: p. 105115. 
90. 
Bothmer, V. and A. Zhukov, The Sun as the prime source of space weather, in Space weather-
physics and effects. 2007, Springer Praxis Books. Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg. p. 31-102. 
91. 
Reitz, G., T. Berger, and D. Matthiae, Radiation exposure in the moon environment. Planetary 
and Space Science, 2012. 74(1): p. 78-83. 
92. 
Grossman, E. and I. Gouzman, Space environment effects on polymers in low earth orbit. 
Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with 
Materials and Atoms, 2003. 208: p. 48-57. 
93. 
Holmes-Siedle, A. and L. Adams, Handbook of radiation effects. 1993, New York, NY (United 
States): Oxford University Press Inc; . 
94. 
Horz, F. Lava tubes-potential shelters for habitats. in Lunar bases and space activities of the 
21st century. 1985. Houston, Texas: Lunar and Planetary Institute. 
95. 
Greeley, R., Lava tubes and channels in the lunar Marius Hills. The Moon, 1971. 3(3): p. 289-
314. 
96. 
Theinat, A.K., A. Modiriasari, A. Bobet, H.J. Melosh, S.J. Dyke, J. Ramirez, A. Maghareh, and 
D. Gomez, Lunar lava tubes: Morphology to structural stability. Icarus, 2020. 338: p. 113442. 
97. 
Jurgens, D. Creating the future of mining – integration and automation. in IMARC. 2017. 
Melbourne, Australia. 
98. 
Hyder, Z., K. Siau, and F. Nah, Artificial intelligence, machine learning, and autonomous 
technologies in mining industry. Journal of Database Management (JDM), 2019. 30(2): p. 67-
79. 
99. 
Kortelainen, J., Utilization of digital twin in model-based control of flotation cells, in School of 
Energy Systems,. 2019, LUT: Lappeenranta, Finland. 
100. 
Watson, A., P. Corser, E. Garces Pardo, T. Lopez Christian, and J. Vandekeybus. A comparison 
of alternative tailings disposal methods—the promises and realities. in Proceedings of the First 
International Seminar on the Reduction of Risk in the Management of Tailings and Mine Waste. 
2010. Perth, Australia: Australian Centre for Geomechanics. 
101. 
ISECG, I.S.E.C.G., In-situ resource utilization gap assessment report. 2021. 
102. 
Kelly, E.G. and D.J. Spottiswood, Introduction to mineral processing. 1982, New York: John 
Wiley & Sons. 
103. 
Bru, K. and D. Parvaz. Improvement of the selective comminution of a low-grade schist ore 
containing cassiterite using a high voltage pulse technology. in Proceedings of the 29th 
International Mineral Processing Congress (IMPC 2018), Moscow, Russian. 2018. 
104. 
Tromans, D., Mineral comminution: Energy efficiency considerations. Minerals Engineering, 
2008. 21(8): p. 613-620. 
105. 
Kawamoto, H. and K. Chin, Particle-Size Classification of Lunar Regolith through Inclined 
Vibrating Tube. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2021. 34(3): p. 06021003. 
106. 
Adachi, M., H. Moroka, H. Kawamoto, S. Wakabayashi, and T. Hoshino, Particle-size sorting 
system of lunar regolith using electrostatic traveling wave. Journal of Electrostatics, 2017. 89: 
p. 69-76. 

107. 
Wilkinson, A. Size beneficiation of regolith for simplicity and efficiency. in Presentation at 
Planetary and Terrestrial Mining and Sciences Symposium (PTMSS), Ottawa, Canada. 2011. 
108. 
Wills, B.A. and J.A. Finch, Chapter 10 - Gravity Concentration, in Wills' Mineral Processing 
Technology (Eighth Edition). 2016, Butterworth-Heinemann: Boston. p. 223-244. 
109. 
Zhang, H., J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, and X. Li, Cyclonic-static micro-bubble flotation 
column. Minerals Engineering, 2013. 45: p. 1-3. 
110. 
Napier-Munn, T., The dense medium cyclone – past, present and future. Minerals Engineering, 
2018. 116: p. 107-113. 
111. 
Das, A. and B. Sarkar, Advanced gravity concentration of fine particles: A review. Mineral 
processing and extractive metallurgy review, 2018. 39(6): p. 359-394. 
112. 
Rasera, J.N., J.J. Cilliers, J.A. Lamamy, and K. Hadler, The beneficiation of lunar regolith for 
space resource utilisation: A review. Planetary and Space Science, 2020. 186: p. 104879. 
113. 
Quinn, J.W., J.G. Captain, K. Weis, E. Santiago-Maldonado, and S. Trigwell, Evaluation of 
tribocharged electrostatic beneficiation of lunar simulant in lunar gravity. Journal of 
Aerospace Engineering, 2013. 26(1): p. 37-42. 
114. 
Trigwell, S., J. Captain, K. Weis, and J. Quinn, Electrostatic beneficiation of lunar regolith: 
applications in in situ resource utilization. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2013. 26(1): p. 
30-36. 
115. 
Afshar-Mohajer, N., C.-Y. Wu, and N. Sorloaica-Hickman, Efficiency determination of an 
electrostatic lunar dust collector by discrete element method. Journal of Applied Physics, 2012. 
112(2): p. 023305. 
116. 
Trigwell, S., J.G. Captain, E.E. Arens, J.W. Quinn, and C.I. Calle, The use of tribocharging in 
the electrostatic beneficiation of lunar simulant. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, 
2009. 45(3): p. 1060-1067. 
117. 
Captain, J., S. Trigwell, E. Arens, A. Biris, J. Captain, J. Quinn, and C. Calle. Tribocharging 
lunar simulant in vacuum for electrostatic beneficiation. in AIP Conference Proceedings. 2007. 
Albuquerque, New Mexico: American Institute of Physics. 
118. 
Trigwell, S., J. Captain, J. Captain, E. Arens, J. Quinn, and C. Calle. Electrostatic beneficiation 
of lunar simulant. in Proc., ESA/IEJ/IEEE-IAS Joint Conference on Electrostatics 2006. 
University of California, Berkeley, California: Laplacian Press,. 
119. 
Li, T., H. Ban, J. Hower, J. Stencel, and K. Saito, Dry triboelectrostatic separation of mineral 
particles: a potential application in space exploration. Journal of electrostatics, 1999. 47(3): p. 
133-142. 
120. 
Agosto, W. Electrostatic separation and sizing of ilmenite in lunar soil simulants and samples. 
in Lunar and Planetary Science Conference Vol. 15. 1984. Houston, Texas. 
121. 
Agosto, W.N. Electrostatic Separation of Binary Comminuted Mineral Mixtures. in Advances 
in the Astronautical Sciences. 1983. 
122. 
Fraas, F., Factors related to mineral separation in a vacuum. Vol. 7404. 1970, Washington 
DC, USA: US Department of the Interior, Bureau of Mines. 
123. 
Trigwell, S., J.E. Lane, J.G. Captain, K.H. Weis, J.W. Quinn, and F. Watanabe, Quantification 
of Efficiency of Beneficiation of Lunar Regolith. Particulate Science and Technology, 2013. 
31(1): p. 45-50. 
124. 
Taylor, L., D. McKay, J. Graf, A. Patchen, S. Wentworth, R. Oder, and E. Jerde. Magnetic 
beneficiation of high-Ti mare basalts: Petrographic analyses. in Lunar and Planetary Science 
Conference. 1992. 
125. 
Oder, R., L. Taylor, and R. Keller. Magnetic characterization of lunar soils. in Lunar and 
Planetary Science Conference 20th. 1989. 
126. 
Berggren, M., R. Zubrin, P. Jonscher, and J. Kilgore. Lunar soil particle separator. in 49th 
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace 
Exposition. 2011. 
127. 
Williams, R.J., D.S. McKay, D. Giles, and T.E. Bunch, Mining and beneficiation of lunar ores. 
Space Resources and Space Settlements: Technical Papers Derived from the 1977 Summer 
Study at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, 1979. 428: p. 275. 
128. 
Farr, B., X. Wang, J. Goree, I. Hahn, U. Israelsson, and M. Horányi, Dust mitigation technology 
for lunar exploration utilizing an electron beam. Acta Astronautica, 2020. 177: p. 405-409. 

129. 
Nunna, V., S. Hapugoda, S.G. Eswarappa, S.K. Raparla, M.I. Pownceby, and G.J. Sparrow, 
Evaluation of Dry Processing Technologies for Treating Low Grade Lateritic Iron Ore Fines. 
Mineral Processing and Extractive Metallurgy Review, 2020: p. 1-17. 
130. 
Dunning, J. and R. Snyder. Electrophoretic separation of lunar soils in a space manufacturing 
facility. in 4th Space manufacturing; Proceedings of the Fifth Conference. 1981. Princeton, NJ, 
U.S.A. 
131. 
Dunning, J., B. Herren, R. Tipps, and R. Snyder, Fractionation of mineral species by 
electrophoresis. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 1982. 87(B13): p. 10781-10788. 
132. 
Kim, K.J., Introduction to Lunar Oxygen Distribution and Its Extraction Technology. Korean 
Journal of Mineralogy and Petrology, 2021. 34(1): p. 83-93. 
133. 
Taylor, L.A. and W.D. Carrier III, Production of oxygen on the Moon: Which processes are 
best and why. AIAA journal, 1992. 30(12): p. 2858-2863. 
134. 
Sanders, G., NASA Lunar ISRU Strategy, NASA, Editor. 2019: washington, DC, USA. 
135. 
Cutler, A.H. and P. Krag. A carbothermal scheme for lunar oxygen production. in Lunar bases 
and space activities of the 21st century. 1985. 
136. 
Sen, S., C.S. Ray, and R.G. Reddy, Processing of lunar soil simulant for space exploration 
applications. Materials Science and Engineering: A, 2005. 413: p. 592-597. 
137. 
Lu, Y. and R.G. Reddy, Extraction of metals and oxygen from lunar soil. High Temperature 
Materials and Processes, 2008. 27(4): p. 223-234. 
138. 
Monchieri, E., S. Hovland, M. Masi, A. Sliepcevich, M. Lavagna, T. Hoppenbrouwers, and F. 
Venditti. ESA Lunar In-Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU) Concept Design and Breadboarding 
Activities. in 61st International Astronautical Congress. 2010. Prague, Czech Republic. 
139. 
Kobayashi, Y., H. Sonezaki, R. Endo, and M. Susa, Reduction kinetics of iron oxides in molten 
lunar soil simulant by graphite. ISIJ international, 2010. 50(1): p. 35-43. 
140. 
Beegle Jr, R., G. Guter, F. Miller, and S. Rosenberg, Research on processes for utilization of 
lunar resources Final report, 22 Apr. 1963-15 Jul. 1965. 1965. 
141. 
Gustafson, R., B. White, M. Fidler, and A. Muscatello. Demonstrating the solar carbothermal 
reduction of lunar regolith to produce oxygen. in 48th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting 
Including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition. 2010. Reston, VA, USA.: 
AIAA. 
142. 
Criswell, D. and R. Waldron. Chemical processing of lunar materials. in 30th IAC. 1979. 
Munich, Germany: IAF. 
143. 
Waldron, R.D. and D.R. Criswell, Materials processing in space, in In Space Industrialization, 
B.O. Leary, Editor. 1982, AIAA: New York, USA. p. 97. 
144. 
Rosenberg, S.D., G.A. Guter, and F. Miller, The on-site manufacture of propellant oxygen from 
lunar resources. Aerospace Chemical Engineering, 1966. 62: p. 61,228-234. 
145. 
Mc Cullough, E. and A. Cutler. ISRU lunar processing research at Boeing. in 39th Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. 2001. Reno, NV, USA: AIAA. 
146. 
Gibson, M.A., C.W. Knudsen, D.J. Brueneman, C.C. Allen, H. Kanamori, and D.S. McKay, 
Reduction of lunar basalt 70035: Oxygen yield and reaction product analysis. Journal of 
Geophysical Research: Planets, 1994. 99(E5): p. 10887-10897. 
147. 
Lu, Y., D. Mantha, and R.G. Reddy, Thermodynamic analysis on lunar soil reduced by 
hydrogen. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions B, 2010. 41(6): p. 1321-1327. 
148. 
Sanders, G.B. and W.E. Larson, Progress Made in Lunar In Situ Resource Utilization under 
NASA’s Exploration Technology and Development Program. Journal of aerospace engineering, 
2013. 26(1): p. 5-17. 
149. 
Allen, C.C., R.V. Morris, and D.S. McKay, Oxygen extraction from lunar soils and pyroclastic 
glass. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 1996. 101(E11): p. 26085-26095. 
150. 
Yoshida, H., T. Watanabe, H. Kanamori, T. Yoshida, S. Ogiwara, and K. Eguchi. Experimental 
study on water production by hydrogen reduction of lunar soil simulant in a fixed bed reactor. 
in Space Resources Roundtable Inc., . 2000. Golden, CO: Lunar and Planetary Institute,. 
151. 
Denk, T., A. González-Pardo, I. Cañadas, and A. Vidal. Design and test of a concentrated solar 
powered fluidized bed reactor for ilmenite reduction. in SolarPACES 2017. Solar Power & 
Chemical Energy Systems. 2017. Santiago de Chile. 

152. 
Sargeant, H., F. Abernethy, S. Barber, I. Wright, M. Anand, S. Sheridan, and A. Morse, 
Hydrogen reduction of ilmenite: Towards an in situ resource utilization demonstration on the 
surface of the Moon. Planetary and Space Science, 2020. 180: p. 104751. 
153. 
Sargeant, H., F. Abernethy, M. Anand, S. Barber, S. Sheridan, I. Wright, and A. Morse, 
Experimental development and testing of the ilmenite reduction reaction for a lunar ISRU 
demonstration with ProSPA. 2019. 
154. 
Kumai, E., M. Tanaka, T. Watanabe, T. Hoshino, S. Hosoda, and H. Kanamori, A Continuous 
Hydrogen Reduction Process for the Production of Water on the Moon. International Journal 
of Microgravity Science and Application, 2021. 38(2): p. 380203. 
155. 
Stancati, M.L., M.K. Jacobs, K.J. Cole, and J.T. Collins, In situ propellant production: 
Alternatives for Mars exploration. NASA CR, 1991. 187192. 
156. 
Williams, R.J. Oxygen extraction from lunar materials: An experimental test of an ilmenite 
reduction process. in Lunar bases and space activities of the 21st century. 1985. Houston, 
Texas: Lunar and Planetary Institute. 
157. 
Allanore, A., Features and challenges of molten oxide electrolytes for metal extraction. Journal 
of The Electrochemical Society, 2015. 162(1): p. E13-E22. 
158. 
Curreri, P., E. Ethridge, S. Hudson, T. Miller, R. Grugel, S. Sen, and D. Sadoway, Process 
demonstration for lunar in situ resource utilization–molten oxide electrolysis. NASA Marshall 
Space Flight Center. MSFC Independent Research and Development Project, 2006(5-81): p. 1. 
159. 
Jarrett, N., S. Das, and W. Haupin, Extraction of oxygen and metals from lunar ores. Space Sol. 
Power Rev.;(United States), 1980. 1(4). 
160. 
Sadoway, D.R., From Oxygen Generation to Metals Production: In Situ Resource Utilization 
by Molten Oxide Electrolysis. The NASA STI Program Office, 2001: p. 525. 
161. 
Kesterke, D.G., Electrowinning of oxygen from silicate rocks. Vol. 7587. 1971, Washington, 
DC: US Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines. 
162. 
Waldron, R., D. Criswell, and T. Erstfeld. Overview of methods for extraterrestrial materials 
processing. in 4th Conference on Space Manufacturing Facilities Princeton University. 1979. 
163. 
Liu, A., Z. Shi, X. Hu, B. Gao, and Z. Wang, Lunar Soil Simulant Electrolysis Using Inert 
Anode for Al-Si Alloy and Oxygen Production. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2017. 
164(2): p. H126-H133. 
164. 
Sirk, A.H., D.R. Sadoway, and L. Sibille, Direct Electrolysis of Molten Lunar Regolith for the 
Production of Oxygen and Metals on the Moon. ECS transactions., 2010. 28(6): p. 367-373. 
165. 
Badescu, V., Moon: Prospective energy and material resources. 2012, Berlin, Germany: 
Springer Science & Business Media. 
166. 
Schreiner, S.S., J.A. Hoffman, G.B. Sanders, and K.A. Lee. Integrated modeling and 
optimization of lunar In-Situ Resource Utilization systems. in 2015 IEEE Aerospace 
Conference. 2015. Montana, USA. 
167. 
Standish, E.C., Design of a molten materials handling device for support of molten regolith 
electrolysis, in Department of Materials Science and Engineering. 2010, The Ohio State 
University: Ohio, USA. 
168. 
Sibille, L., D. Sadoway, A. Sirk, P. Tripathy, O. Melendez, E. Standish, J. Dominguez, D. 
Stefanescu, P. Curreri, and S. Poizeau. Recent advances in scale-up development of molten 
regolith electrolysis for oxygen production in support of a lunar base. in 47th AIAA Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting including The New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition. 2009. 
Orlando, Florida, USA. 
169. 
Mueller, R.P., L. Sibille, J. Dunn, S. Seal, K. Grossman, J. Mantovani, L. Roberson, N.J. 
Gelino, I.I. Townsend, and J.M. Schuler, FY17 Report Summaries of Five Completed Center 
Innovation Fund (CIF) Projects for the Highlights/Abstract Section of the FY 2018 CIF Annual 
Report. 2018. 
170. 
Schreiner, S.S., Molten Regolith Electrolysis reactor modeling and optimization of in-situ 
resource utilization systems. 2015, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
171. 
Vai, A., J. Yurko, D. Wang, and D. Sadoway. Molten oxide electrolysis for lunar oxygen 
generation using in situ resources. in Jim Evans Honorary Symposium. 2010. Warrendale, PA, 
USA: TMS. 
172. 
Steurer, W.H., Extraterrestrial materials processing. 1982, CA, USA: NASA, JPL. 

173. 
du Fresne, E. and J. Schroeder, Magma electrolysis, in Research on the Use of Space Resources. 
1983, NASA: Pasadena California. p. 71-91. 
174. 
Colson, R. and L. Haskin, Oxygen and iron production by electrolytic smelting of lunar soil. 
Washington University, NASA, 1991. 
175. 
Schwandt, C., J.A. Hamilton, D.J. Fray, and I.A. Crawford, The production of oxygen and metal 
from lunar regolith. Planetary and space science, 2012. 74(1): p. 49-56. 
176. 
Lomax, B.A., M. Conti, N. Khan, N.S. Bennett, A.Y. Ganin, and M.D. Symes, Proving the 
viability of an electrochemical process for the simultaneous extraction of oxygen and 
production of metal alloys from lunar regolith. Planetary and Space Science, 2019: p. 104748. 
177. 
Nakamura, T. and C.L. Senior. Solar Thermal Power System for Lunar ISRU Processes. in AIP 
Conference Proceedings 746. 2005. Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA. 
178. 
Senior, C. Lunar oxygen production by pyrolysis. in Space Programs and Technologies 
Conference. 1992. Huntsville, AL, USA: AIAA. 
179. 
Sauerborn, M., Pyrolyse von Metalloxiden und Silikaten unter Vakuum mit konzentrierter 
Solarstrahlung. 2005, Universitäts-und Landesbibliothek Bonn: Bonn, Germany. 
180. 
Sauerborn, M., A. Neumann, W. Seboldt, and B. Diekmann. Solar heated vacuum pyrolysis of 
lunar soil. in 35th COSPAR Scientific Assembly. 2004. Paris, France. 
181. 
Getty, S.A., L. Inge, S.H. Feng, W.B. Brinckerhoff, E.H. Cardiff, V.E. Holmes, T.T. King, M.J. 
Li, E. Mumm, and P.R. Mahaffy, Development of an evolved gas-time-of-flight mass 
spectrometer for the Volatile Analysis by Pyrolysis of Regolith (VAPoR) instrument. 
International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 2010. 295(3): p. 124-132. 
182. 
Cardiff, E.H., B.R. Pomeroy, I.S. Banks, and A. Benz. Vacuum pyrolysis and related ISRU 
Techniques. in AIP Conference Proceedings. 2007. Albuquerque, New Mexico: AIP. 
183. 
Matchett, J., Production of lunar oxygen through vacuum pyrolysis, in School of Engineering 
and Applied Science. 2006, George Washington Univ Washington, DC, USA  
184. 
Steurer, W., Vapor phase pyrolysis. Space resources 1992. 3(NASA SP-509): p. 210. 
185. 
Steurer, W. and B. Nerad, Vapor phase reduction. Research on the Use of Space Resources, 
ed. WF Carroll, NASA JPL Publ, 1983: p. 83-36. 
186. 
Cardiff, E. and B. Pomeroy. Development Of Vacuum Pyrolysis Techniques. in Space 
Resources Roundtable VIII: Program and Abstracts(LPI Contribution No. 1332). 2007. 
187. 
Moulford, W., A. Martin, P. Cains, P. Martin, and G. Tan, A Preliminary Design of a Pilot 
Plant for the Production of Lunar Oxygen, in Engineering, Construction, and Operations in 
Space V. 1996. p. 762-768. 
188. 
Sparks, D.R., Vacuum Reduction of Extraterrestrial Silicates. Journal of Spacecraft and 
Rockets, 1988. 25(2): p. 187-189. 
189. 
Burton, R.L., P.J. Schubert, F. Rysanek, P. Fenoglio, and M. Hutches, Oxygen extraction 
apparatus and process. 2011, Google Patents. 
190. 
Burton, R. and D. King, Hydrogen-Enhanced Lunar Oxygen Extraction and Storage Using 
Only Solar Power. NASA Tech Briefs, 2013(July 2013). 
191. 
Schubert, P.J., Oxygen Separation from Lunar Regolith. 2007, SAE Technical Paper. 
192. 
Carroll, W.F., Research on the use of space resources, NASA, Editor. 1983, JPL publication: 
Pasadena California. 
193. 
Sen, S., D. Butts, J. O'Dell, and C. Ray, Plasma processing of lunar regolith simulant for 
oxygen and glass production, in Earth and Space 2010: Engineering, Science, Construction, 
and Operations in Challenging Environments. 2010. p. 1343-1352. 
194. 
Fox, E.T., Ionic Liquid and In Situ Resource Utilization, NASA, Editor. 2019: Washington DC, 
USA. 
195. 
Karr, L.J., P.A. Curreri, G.S. Thornton, K.E. Depew, J.M. Vankeuren, M. Regelman, E.T. Fox, 
M.J. Marone, D.N. Donovan, and M.S. Paley. Ionic Liquid Facilitated Recovery of Metals and 
Oxygen from Regolith. in 2018 AIAA SPACE and Astronautics Forum and Exposition. 2018. 
Orlando, FL: AIAA. 
196. 
Paley, M.S., L.J. Karr, and P. Curreri. Oxygen Production from Lunar Regolith using Ionic 
Liquids. in Space Propuls. Energy Sci. Int. Forum. 2009. Huntsville, Alabama, USA. 
197. 
Xie, K., Z. Shi, J. Xu, X. Hu, B. Gao, and Z. Wang, Aluminothermic Reduction-Molten Salt 
Electrolysis Using Inert Anode for Oxygen and Al-Base Alloy Extraction from Lunar Soil 

Simulant. JOM : The journal of the Minerals, Metals and Materials Society, 2017. 69(10): p. 
1963-1969. 
198. 
Rao, D.B., U. Choudary, T. Erstfeld, R.J. Williams, and Y. Chang, Extraction processes for the 
production of aluminum, titanium, iron, magnesium, and oxygen and nonterrestrial sources, in 
Space Resources and Space Settlements. NASA SP-428, W.G. John Billingham, and Brian 
O'Leary, Editor. 1979, NASA: Washington, D.C., USA. p. 257. 
199. 
Anthony, D., W. Cochran, W. Haupin, R. Keller, and K. Larimer. Dry Extraction of Silicon and 
Aluminium from Lunar Ores. in Second Conference on Lunar Bases and Space Activities of the 
21st Century. 1988. Houston, Texas. 
200. 
Sammells, A. and K. Semkow. Electrolytic cell for lunar ore refining and electric energy 
storage. in Second Conference on Lunar Bases and Space Activities of the 21st Century. 1988. 
Houston, TX, USA: LPI. 
201. 
Semkow, K.W. and A.F. Sammells, The indirect electrochemical refining of lunar ores. J. 
Electrochem. Soc., 1987. 134: p. 2088. 
202. 
Sullivan, T.A., A Modified Sulfate Process to Lunar Oxygen, in Engineering, Construction, and 
Operations in Space Iii, Vols 1 and 2, W.Z. Sadeh, S. Sture, and R.J. Miller, Editors. 1992: 
New York. p. 641-650. 
203. 
Landis, G.A., Materials refining on the Moon. Acta astronautica., 2007. 60(10-11): p. 906-915. 
204. 
Seboldt, W., S. Lingner, S. Hoernes, W. Grimmeisen, R. Lekies, R. Herkelmann, and D.M. 
Burt, Lunar oxygen extraction using fluorine, in Resources of near earth space, J.S.L. Mary L. 
Guerrieri, Mildred S. Matthews, Editor. 1993, University of Arizona Press: Tucson, USA. p. 
129-148. 
205. 
Burt, D.M. Lunar mining of oxygen using fluorine. in The Second Conference on Lunar Bases 
and Space Activities of the 21st Century. 1992. Houston, Texas: Johnson Space Center. 
206. 
Reichert, M., S. Lingner, and W. Seboldt, Lunar oxygen: Economic benefit for transportation 
systems and in situ production by fluorination. Acta Astronautica, 1994. 32(12): p. 809-820. 
207. 
Turan, E.M., S.A. Stein, R. Maharaj, and K.P. Möller, A Flow Sheet for the Conversion of 
Lunar Regolith Using Fluorine Gas. Advances in Space Research, 2020. 
208. 
Castelein, S.M., T.F. Aarts, J. Schleppi, R. Hendrikx, A.J. Böttger, D. Benz, M. Marechal, A. 
Makaya, S.J. Brouns, and M. Schwentenwein, Iron can be microbially extracted from Lunar 
and Martian regolith simulants and 3D printed into tough structural materials. Plos one, 2021. 
16(4): p. e0249962. 
209. 
Volger, R., G. Pettersson, S. Brouns, L. Rothschild, A. Cowley, and B. Lehner, Mining moon 
& mars with microbes: Biological approaches to extract iron from Lunar and Martian regolith. 
Planetary and Space Science, 2020: p. 104850. 
210. 
Lehner, B.A.E., J. Schlechten, A. Filosa, A. Canals Pou, D.G. Mazzotta, F. Spina, L. Teeney, 
J. Snyder, S.Y. Tjon, A.S. Meyer, S.J.J. Brouns, A. Cowley, and L.J. Rothschild, End-to-end 
mission design for microbial ISRU activities as preparation for a moon village. Acta 
Astronautica, 2019. 162: p. 216-226. 
211. 
Landis, G. Calcium Reduction as a Process for Oxygen Production from Lunar Regolith. in 
49th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace 
Exposition. 2011. Orlando, Florida, USA. 
212. 
Grill, L., P. Ostermeier, M. Würth, and P. Reiss, Behaviour of lunar regolith simulants in 
fluidised bed reactors for in-situ resource utilisation. Planetary and Space Science, 2020. 180: 
p. 104757. 
213. 
Dalton, B.P. and F.F. Roberto, Lunar regolith biomining: workshop report, NASA, Editor. 
2008: Moffett Field, CA. 
214. 
Godula-Jopek, A., W. Jehle, and J. Wellnitz, Hydrogen storage technologies. Weinheim, 
Tyskland: Wiley-VCH Verlag & Co, kap, 2012. 4: p. 100-104. 
215. 
Lomax, B.A., M. Conti, N. Khan, N.S. Bennett, A.Y. Ganin, and M.D. Symes, Proving the 
viability of an electrochemical process for the simultaneous extraction of oxygen and 
production of metal alloys from lunar regolith. Planetary and Space Science, 2020. 180: p. 
104748. 
216. 
Jiao, S. and D.J. Fray, Development of an inert anode for electrowinning in calcium chloride–
calcium oxide melts. Metallurgical and materials transactions B, 2010. 41(1): p. 74-79. 

217. 
Kim, H., J. Paramore, A. Allanore, and D.R. Sadoway, Electrolysis of molten iron oxide with 
an iridium anode: the role of electrolyte basicity. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2011. 
158(10): p. E101-E105. 
218. 
Allanore, A., L. Yin, and D.R. Sadoway, A new anode material for oxygen evolution in molten 
oxide electrolysis. Nature, 2013. 497(7449): p. 353. 
219. 
Ge, J., X. Zou, S. Almassi, L. Ji, B.P. Chaplin, and A.J. Bard, Electrochemical production of 
Si without generation of CO2 based on the use of a dimensionally stable anode in molten CaCl2. 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 2019. 58(45): p. 16223-16228. 
220. 
Wang, D., A.J. Gmitter, and D.R. Sadoway, Production of oxygen gas and liquid metal by 
electrochemical decomposition of molten iron oxide. Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 
2011. 158(6): p. E51-E54. 
221. 
Reiss, P., P. Hager, A. Hoehn, M. Rott, and U. Walter, Flowability of lunar regolith simulants 
under reduced gravity and vacuum in hopper-based conveying devices. Journal of 
Terramechanics, 2014. 55: p. 61-72. 
222. 
Lim, S. and M. Anand, Numerical modelling of the microwave heating behaviour of lunar 
regolith. Planetary and Space Science, 2019: p. 104723. 
223. 
Zhang, Y., M. Shaw, A. Rhamdhani, C. Guo, and G. Brooks, Heat Transfer Analysis on Lunar 
Regolith Thermal Processing Subjected to Concentrated Solar Energy - Unpublished 
Manuscript. 2021, Swinburne University of Technology. 
 
