Two-Scale Optimization of Graded Lattice Structures
respecting Buckling on Micro- and Macroscale
Daniel H¨ubner1*, Fabian Wein1 and Michael Stingl1
1Applied Mathematics, Continuous Optimization, Friedrich-Alexander Universit¨at
Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Cauerstr. 11, Erlangen, 91058, Germany.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): daniel.huebner@fau.de;
Contributing authors: fabian.wein@fau.de; michael.stingl@fau.de;
Abstract
Interest in components with detailed structures increased with the progress in advanced manu-
facturing techniques in recent years. Parts with graded lattice elements can provide interesting
mechanical, thermal, and acoustic properties compared to parts where only coarse features are
included. One of these improvements is better global buckling resistance of the component. How-
ever, thin features are prone to local buckling. Normally, analyses with high computational eﬀort
are conducted on high-resolution ﬁnite element meshes to optimize parts with good global and local
stability. Until recently, works focused only on either global or local buckling behavior. We use
two-scale optimization based on asymptotic homogenization of elastic properties and local buck-
ling behavior to reduce the eﬀort of full-scale analyses. For this, we present an approach for
concurrent local and global buckling optimization of parameterized graded lattice structures. It is
based on a worst-case model for the homogenized buckling load factor, which acts as a safeguard
against pure local buckling. Cross-modes residing on both scales are not detected. We support
our theory with numerical examples and validations on dehomogenized designs, which show the
capabilities of our method, and discuss the advantages and limitations of the worst-case model.
Keywords: structural optimization, instability, buckling, two-scale, cellular materials
1 Introduction
The ongoing progress in additive manufacturing
allows structures with ﬁne details to gain increas-
ing focus. Lattice structures in particular, both
homogeneous and graded, are utilized in many
applications, e.g., thermal management, energy
absorption, noise reduction, biomedical engineer-
ing, etc. (Rahman et al. 2022). Lattice inﬁll is also
recognized as potentially increasing global buck-
ling resistance of a component (Clausen et al.
2016). However, ﬁne features are prone to local
buckling (Ferrari and Sigmund 2019).
Two-scale optimization (Wu et al. 2021) can
be used to design such structures without the need
to resolve all the ﬁne details of the full design
in a single setting. The idea of this approach
started with the work of Bendsøe and Kikuchi
(1988), in which the design process is divided into
two scales: the macroscopic scale, which describes
the overall component, and the microscopic scale,
which shows the ﬁne details. Bendsøe and Kikuchi
bridged the gap between these two scales by
asymptotic homogenization (Allaire et al. 1997).
This technique yields approximate material prop-
erties of microstructures on the macroscopic scale,
1
arXiv:2303.08710v1  [cs.CE]  15 Mar 2023

which can then be used in macroscopic con-
stitutive equations. Choosing a parameterized
microstructure, Bendsøe and Kikuchi were able
to eﬀectively decouple the scales: Prior to any
optimization procedure a discrete subset of the
parameter space is chosen and homogenization is
conducted for each of the microstructures gained
from this parameter set. The obtained properties
are then interpolated in the continuous param-
eter space and the interpolated material model
can later be reused to solve various optimization
problems. This technique introduces an interpola-
tion error, but requires less computational eﬀort
when compared with on the ﬂy homogenization,
i.e., homogenization performed for each ﬁnite ele-
ment in the discretized design domain and for
each update step of the design during an iterative
optimization procedure. Moreover the interpola-
tion error can be controlled in a rather straight
forward way during preprocessing.
Though there is exhaustive literature on opti-
mal design considering the buckling behavior of
structures using beam models (Ferrari and Sig-
mund (2019) and references therein), only a rela-
tively small number of publications for continuum
models exist. The initial problems evolved around
ﬁnding optimal cross-sections for columns of ﬁxed
length and weight subject to uniaxial compression
loads (Clausen 1851; Keller 1960; Tadjbakhsh and
Keller 1962; Huang and Sheu 1968; Khot et al.
1976). Neves et al. (1995) were the ﬁrst to conduct
topology optimization with respect to buckling
based on the method of Bendsøe and Kikuchi
described above. However, they encountered vari-
ous obstacles in the linear buckling analysis, which
is stated as an eigenvalue problem (Bendsøe and
Sigmund 2003). This includes localized modes in
low density regions and clustering of eigenval-
ues when approaching the ﬁnal design (Seyranian
et al. 1994). Actions to alleviate issues with artiﬁ-
cial, low-density modes have been proposed, e.g.,
diﬀerent interpolation schemes for the stiﬀness
and geometric stiﬀness matrices (Pedersen 2000;
Bendsøe and Sigmund 2003) or applying an eigen-
value shift based on the last iteration and iden-
tifying artiﬁcial modes by their contribution to
the total strain energy (Gao and Ma 2015). There
are also methods for avoiding low-density regions
like ﬁltering and projection of the pseudo-density
(Larsen et al. 2018), penalization of intermedi-
ate values in the objective (Allaire and Francfort
1993; Allaire and Kohn 1993), or element removal
strategies (Behrou et al. 2021; Dalklint et al. 2020;
Giele et al. 2021). Clustering of eigenvalues can
be prevented by enforcing gaps between the eigen-
values (Bendsøe and Sigmund 2003). However, a
large number of eigenvalues may still have to be
computed to achieve good convergence (Bruyneel
et al. 2008), which compels the use of eﬃcient
eigenproblem solvers (Dunning et al. 2016; Ferrari
and Sigmund 2020). Nevertheless, topology opti-
mization with respect to buckling still currently
poses a challenging problem.
More recently, stability requirements have also
been employed when tailoring microstructures
(Neves et al. 2002b,a; Thomsen et al. 2018; Ander-
sen et al. 2022), though models for the buckling
of periodic microstructures have been investigated
for decades. Homogenization theory for buck-
ling load factors is well established (Neves et al.
2002b; Thomsen et al. 2018), but several chal-
lenges still arise in this context. Buckling modes
can range from high-frequency modes with a wave-
length shorter than the characteristic size of the
microstructure to modes that span over multiple
periods of the microstructure. Floquet-Bloch the-
ory can be used to capture the latter in particular
(Neves 2019).
For dehomogenized designs scale eﬀects stem-
ming from a ﬁnite cell size and eﬀects due to grad-
ing of the microstructure might appear (Thomsen
et al. 2018). Especially the latter might lead to
an occurrence of undesired buckling modes at the
boundary of the structure.
The aforementioned works only investigate
the buckling behavior of a structure on a sin-
gle scale, either macroscopic or microscopic. Even
with the ongoing ”competition for ultimately stiﬀ
and strong architected materials” (Andersen et al.
2021), these designed materials appear not to
have been utilized so far in the optimization of
components with stability requirements.
In this article, we present a two-scale topol-
ogy optimization approach, where we incorporate
buckling on both scales individually, but neglect
cross-modes spanning over both scales. Assuming
separation of length scales, we use homogenization
theory to upscale the elastic behavior and buck-
ling stability of a periodic lattice that resides on
the microscopic scale. On the macroscopic scale we

search for an optimal lattice grading with respect
to both local and global buckling. We parameter-
ize the lattice by its porosity, precompute homog-
enized properties for a selected set of porosities,
and obtain a model on the continuous parameter
space by piecewise cubic interpolation. This model
is then used in macroscopic optimization problems
with the local lattice porosity as design variable.
Thus, our method can be classiﬁed as a multi-scale
density optimization approach with a parameter-
ized unit cell based on the microstructure porosity
(category V/A in Wu et al. (2021)).
Our contribution is a new approach to inte-
grate the upscaled microscopic buckling informa-
tion into the optimization. From the macroscopic
local stress, we obtain the buckling response on
the microscale via a worst-case model, which acts
as a safeguard against pure microscopic buckling.
The worst case is realized by reducing the macro-
scopic local stress to its magnitude for reasons of
computational eﬀort. This comes at the cost of
underestimation of predicted critical loads for the
microstructure.
Recent work by Wang et al. (2021) is close to
our approach. However, they deduce local stress
constraints from the slenderness ratio of the lat-
tice struts, while we directly use upscaled micro-
scopic buckling information. Our approach has the
advantage that essentially arbitrary microstruc-
tures can be treated, including those for which a
slenderness ratio could not be uniquely deﬁned.
The work of Christensen et al. (2022) is similar
to ours, with some key diﬀerences: They assume
isotropic buckling behavior of the microstruc-
ture, while our approach is applicable to arbitrary
microstructures. They also ﬁt a Willam-Warnke
failure criterion to homogenized data, which intro-
duces an approximation error of the local buckling
factor. In contrast, we build a worst-case model
from homogenized data, which also comes with
an approximation error; however, applying a full
interpolation model in lieu of the worst case, it
is possible to render this error negligible (see
Remark 1 in Section 4.1). Moreover, Christensen
et al. (2022) employ a two term interpolation
scheme to interpolate the buckling strength as a
function of the relative porosity, whereas we use
more accurate piecewise cubic interpolation. On
the other hand, our approach is limited to sizing
problems with a lower bound on the lattice density
everywhere, while a major contribution of Chris-
tensen et al. (2022) is the possibility to allow for
void regions in the design while still being able to
maintain the lower bound on the density of the
lattice using an auxiliary design ﬁeld.
In this article, we restrict the analyses to
linear elasticity and linearized buckling, though
the general idea of the method can be extended
to non-linear regimes. We also limit ourselves
to a two-dimensional setting in this article to
keep notations simple. However, it is straightfor-
ward to extend our approach to three dimensions.
We emphasize that our method is applicable to
arbitrary, parameterized microstructures. As an
example, we choose a lattice consisting of equilat-
eral triangles that is parameterized by its porosity.
More sophisticated geometries and parameteriza-
tions are possible with higher computational eﬀort
without changing the general method.
The remainder of the article is structured as
follows: In Section 2 we recap the state equations
for linear elasticity and linearized buckling anal-
ysis. Section 3 brieﬂy presents the main formulas
for asymptotic homogenization of elasticity mod-
ulus and buckling load factors. We describe our
exemplary microstructure, its parameterization,
and important aspects for the upscaling process in
Section 4. We present our method for designing a
lattice unit cell by rounding corners of an equilat-
eral triangle, showing ﬁnite element convergence
on the microscopic scale, and obtaining homoge-
nized properties of a lattice. Section 4.1 provides
the novel approach to include the upscaled prop-
erties on the macroscopic scale via the suggested
worst-case model for the homogenized buckling
load factor. Section 4.2 demonstrates how to
precompute homogenized properties on a dis-
cretized parameter space and apply an interpo-
lation scheme to yield values on the continuous
parameter space. Section 5 outlines three diﬀerent
two-scale optimization problems considering buck-
ling on the macroscopic scale, on the microscopic
scale and on both scales (without cross-modes).
Associated numerical examples are presented in
Section 6 together with a pre-study, which helps to
develop a better understanding of the optimized
designs. A numerical validation on dehomogenized
designs is given in Section 7.1 accompanied by a
study on scale separation. We examine the impact
of the worst-case error closely in Section 7.2 by

means of two numerical examples. Finally, we
complete with conclusions in Section 8.
2 Linear elasticity and
buckling analysis
In this section we brieﬂy recap the state equations
for linear elasticity and buckling analysis on an
algebraic level as given by Thomsen et al. (2018).
For continuous formulations in weak form, inter-
ested readers are referred to Neves (2019). We
assume a linear elasticity setting and linear bifur-
cation buckling condition. This means that the
prebuckling displacement, stresses, and strains
vary linearly with the applied load and that the
load factor, which indicates stability, appears lin-
early in the bifurcation eigenvalue problem. Linear
buckling analysis consists of two steps: First, we
solve the linear elasticity state equation for dis-
placements of a structure under a given load.
Then, an eigenvalue problem is solved, where the
eigenvalues correspond to bifurcation points, and
eigenvectors are interpreted as buckling modes of
deﬂection.
Throughout this article, we apply Voigt nota-
tion for tensors and assume plane stress condi-
tions.
Let us consider a body Ω⊂R2 and its dis-
cretization Ω△= SM
e=1 Ωe by M ﬁnite elements.
Then the state equation of linear elasticity for Ω△
reads as (Zienkiewicz et al. 2005):
K(ρ)u = f,
(1)
where u is the sought-for vector of displacements,
ρ ∈(0, 1]M is the pseudo-density ﬁeld and f is the
applied load vector (reference load). The stiﬀness
matrix is given by
K(ρ) =
M
^
e=1
Nip
X
k=1
ce,kB⊤
e,kE(ρe)Be,k
(2)
with assembly operator denoted by V and number
of integration points Nip. E(ρe) is the elasticity
tensor, which depends on the pseudo-density in
element e. Be,k is the strain-displacement matrix
of element e evaluated in the k-th integration
point and contains derivatives of the ﬁnite ele-
ment’s shape functions. The factor
ce,k = det(Je)we,k
(3)
contains the Jacobian determinant det(Je) of ele-
ment e and the integration weight we,k associated
with the k-th integration point of said element.
The buckling equation is given by the eigen-
value problem,
(K(ρ) −Λ G(ρ, u(ρ))) φ = 0,
(4)
and is solved for pairs of eigenvalues Λℓand eigen-
vectors φℓ, ℓ≤M. Eigenvalues of (4) are also
called load factors. The critical load, under which
buckling occurs, can be computed by multiply-
ing the reference load f with the eigenvalue with
the smallest absolute value, which is also known
as the critical load factor or buckling load fac-
tor (BLF). If the critical load factor is less than
or equal to one, the structure buckles; otherwise,
the structure is stable with respect to the applied
reference load. The stress stiﬀness matrix (or geo-
metric stiﬀness matrix) (Nˇemec et al. 2016) in (4)
is given by
G(ρ, u(ρ)) =
M
^
e=1
Nip
X
k=1
ce,k ˜
Be,i,k(σe(ue(ρ)))i,j ˜
Be,j,k,
(5)
where summation over i and j is implied. Again,
ce,k includes the Jacobian determinant of element
e and the integration weight at the k-th integra-
tion point. The integrated stress in element e is
numerically evaluated as
σe(ue(ρ)) =
Nip
X
k=1
ce,kE(ρe)Be,kue(ρ),
(6)
and
˜
Be,i,k = ∂Ne
∂xi (xk)
(7)
is the derivative of the matrix of the shape func-
tions evaluated at integration point xk. Usually,
solutions to (4) are considered ordered accord-
ing to the absolute value of the load factors with
Λ1 as the smallest value and eigenvectors are
G-normalized, i.e.,
φ⊤G φ = 1.
(8)

In single-scale topology optimization, (6) can lead
to artiﬁcial buckling modes in low density regions
(Neves et al. 1995). However, in our approach the
macroscopic pseudo-density represents the local
relative lattice volume. Thus, low density regions
represent thin lattice, and modes in such regions
are not artiﬁcial, but rather comply with buckling
of the lattice.
Following Rodrigues et al. (1995), the sensitiv-
ity of an eigenvalue with algebraic multiplicity one
with respect to density ρe is given as
∂Λ
∂ρe
=

φ⊤
∂K
∂ρe
−Λ ∂G
∂ρe

φ −Λw⊤∂K
∂ρe
u

.
(9)
Here, w is the adjoint state obtained from the
solution of the equation
K(ρ) w = φ⊤∇uG(ρ, u(ρ)) φ.
(10)
For eigenvalues with multiplicity greater one, the
derivative of the load factor function does not exist
in a strict sense. Nevertheless, using (9) still an
element of the subdiﬀerential can be computed
(Rodrigues et al. 1995). Alternatively, derivations
for multiple eigenvalues can be used (Seyranian
et al. 1994).
Note that G is in general not positive deﬁnite,
so sometimes a reformulation of the eigenvalue
problem (4) to
 G(ρ, u(ρ)) −1
ΛK(ρ)

φ = 0,
(11)
might be beneﬁcial, as K is always positive deﬁ-
nite for ρ > 0.
3 Asymptotic homogenization
To obtain the mechanical properties of a lattice
structure on the macroscopic scale, we perform
asymptotic homogenization. We brieﬂy recall the
homogenization formulas in the two-dimensional
setting, which can be found, e.g., in Thomsen et al.
(2018). Note that we do not perform topology
optimization on the microscopic scale, but rather
investigate given periodic lattice structures. Thus,
there is only a ﬁnite element mesh for the solid
material region.
This prevents spurious modes, which typically
arise in low density regions during topology opti-
mization (Neves et al. 1995). However, we might
get artiﬁcial modes owing to the ﬁnite element
discretization. These modes are usually highly
localized and can be ﬁltered by setting a thresh-
old on the minimal number of nodes that have to
exhibit deﬂection, e.g., 5% of all nodes in the ﬁnite
element mesh.
As we do not perform topology optimization
on the microscopic scale and are only interested
in obtaining the critical load factor of a given
microstructure, sensitivities are not required here
and thus clustering of eigenvalues as described in
the work by Neves et al. (2002a) is not an issue.
3.1 Linear elasticity
We choose a representative volume element (RVE)
Y , which is discretized with m ﬁnite elements
Ye, i.e., Y
= Sm
e=1 Ye. We solve the equilib-
rium equations on the microscopic scale for the
Y -periodic ﬁelds χj using three test ﬁelds f j:
Kχj = f j,
j = 1, 2, 3
(12)
with stiﬀness matrix K and f j given by
K =
m
^
e=1
nip
X
k=1
ce,kB⊤
e,kE0Be,k
(13)
and
f j =
m
^
e=1
nip
X
k=1
ce,kB⊤
e,kE0˜ϵj.
(14)
nip is the number of integration points, E0 is the
elasticity tensor for the base material and ˜ϵj are
unit strain ﬁelds with ˜ϵj
i = δij. We note that
the Y -periodicity is realized by assuming same
values for the solutions on opposite sides of Y .
The homogenized constitutive tensor EH of the
microstructure is then given by
EH
i,j =
1
|Y |
m
^
e=1
nip
X
k=1
ce,k
 ˜ϵi −Be,kχi
e
⊤E0  ˜ϵj −Be,kχj
e

.
(15)
3.2 Buckling
The equilibrium equation for buckling on the
microscopic scale is an eigenvalue problem as in
the macroscopic setting (cf. (4)) and is solved for

pairs of eigenvalues λℓand associated eigenvectors
ϕℓ, ℓ≤m:
(K −λ G(χ, ¯σ))ϕ = 0
(16)
As in the macroscopic setting, the eigenvalue with
the smallest absolute value denotes the buckling
load factor. G is the microscopic initial stress
stiﬀness matrix (cf. (5))
G(χ, ¯σ) =
m
^
e=1
nip
X
k=1
ce,k ˜
B⊤
e,i,k(σe(χ, ¯σ))i,j ˜
Be,j,k
(17)
with
σe(χ, ¯σ) = E0(I −BeXe) ¯ϵ(¯σ).
(18)
The microscopic initial stress tensor σe describes
how the macroscopic strain ¯ϵ is distributed in
unit cell Y . We note that (18) already takes
stress ampliﬁcation (see Ferrer et al. (2021)) into
account. The macroscopic strain is given as solu-
tion of the macroscopic constitutive equation
¯ϵ(¯σ) = (EH)−1¯σ
(19)
and Xe = [χ1
e χ2
e χ3
e] contains the solutions of
(12). The macroscopic stress ¯σ is obtained via (1)
and (6). Parameterization of the lattice geometry
and linearity of the buckling analysis allows us
to precompute homogenized properties. Thus, we
can avoid solving homogenization problems during
optimization (cf. Section 4.2).
We want to emphasize that the buckling analy-
sis in (4) and (16) yields pure global and pure local
modes, respectively. In particular, cross-modes
spanning over both scales and deﬁned as a solu-
tion to Eq. (40) in the work of Neves (2019), are
not detected.
4 Microstructure
parameterization and
upscaling model
In the following section, we present our method to
integrate the microscopic buckling load factor into
a macroscopic scale optimization problem. The
explanation is done for an exemplary lattice struc-
ture; however, we would like to stress again that
d
R1
R2
Fig. 1 Principal design of an equilateral triangular lattice
structure with highlighted unit cell. The lattice geometry
is given by primitive lattice vectors R1 and R2. For our
enhanced version, see Fig. 8.
the method can be applied to arbitrary base cell
topologies. We ﬁrst demonstrate an approach to
obtain the homogenized load factors of the lattice.
The exemplary lattice we chose consists of
equilateral triangles with edge length d, as the
principal design of our microstructure. The primi-
tive lattice vectors are thus given by R1 = (1, 0)⊤
and R2 = (1/2,
p
(3)/2)⊤(Fig. 1). This design
is known in literature to provide good macro-
scopic buckling strength (Clausen et al. 2016).
To get a periodic unit cell, we take two of these
triangles, which together form a parallelogram,
including its shorter diagonal (see Fig. 1). We
parameterize the unit cell by one parameter ρ,
which describes the relative volume or one minus
porosity, respectively. With this parameterization
the homogenization procedures from Section 3 can
be written using two maps:
EH : (0, 1] →S3,
ρ 7→EH(ρ),
(20)
λ : R3 × (0, 1] →R,
(¯σ, ρ) 7→λ(¯σ, ρ)
(21)
(20) assigns each relative volume ρ a symmet-
ric, positive deﬁnite homogenized elasticity tensor
computed from (15), while (21) maps a macro-
scopic stress and a relative volume to the resulting
homogenized buckling load factor λ(¯σ, ρ) obtained
by solving (16).
As material parameters, we chose a Young’s
modulus of 10 Pa and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3.
Next, we present three aspects that are impor-
tant for the upscaling process: the design of joints
of lattice struts, the resolution of the ﬁnite element
mesh on the microscopic level, and the number of

M1
r1
M2
r2
r2
w1
w1
w2
w2
Fig. 2 To prevent stress concentrations, lattice corners
are rounded by circular arcs, which are deﬁned by a given
radius. The ﬁgure shows the resulting lattice boundary for
two conﬁgurations with diﬀerent radii r1 and r2. The arc
midpoint M and lattice strut width w are determined by
the radius via geometric calculations, forcing the relative
volume fraction of the lattice constant.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
relative corner radius / -
buckling load factor / -
volume 20%
volume 30%
volume 40%
volume 50%
Fig. 3 Normalized homogenized buckling load factor for
¯σ) = (−1, 0, 0) and diﬀerent relative volumes as a function
of the radius of rounded corners. The radius is given relative
to a unit cells edge length d.
unit cells in an RVE. We note that the latter is
automatically covered if a Floquet-Bloch approach
along with a suﬃciently ﬁne discretization of the
Brillouin zone is used.
Rounded corners
A unit cell design with sharp corners where the
lattice struts meet leads to local stress concentra-
tions at those corners. To circumvent this issue, we
round the corners with circular arcs with radius r,
while keeping the overall volume of the structure
constant (Fig. 2). A lattice with rounded unit cells
can be seen in Fig. 8.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
relative corner radius / -
Young’s modulus / Pa
volume 20%
volume 30%
volume 40%
volume 50%
Fig. 4 Normalized homogenized Young’s modulus for dif-
ferent relative volumes as a function of the radius of
rounded corners. The radius is given relative to a unit cells
edge length d.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
relative corner radius / -
Poisson’s ratio / -
volume 20%
volume 30%
volume 40%
volume 50%
Fig. 5 Normalized homogenized Poisson’s ratio for diﬀer-
ent relative volumes as a function of the radius of rounded
corners. The radius is given relative to a unit cells edge
length d.
It turns out that the choice of the radius
parameterizing the arcs has only minor eﬀect on
the Poisson’s ratio (Fig. 5). The Young’s modulus
is aﬀected mainly for small relative lattice vol-
ume (Fig. 4); for a small volume, a large radius
leads to very thin lattice struts due to volume
preservation (cf. Fig. 2) and the lattice loses stiﬀ-
ness. The impact on the homogenized buckling
load factor is more signiﬁcant as can be seen in
Fig. 3. For small radii, the buckling resistance
increases with increasing radius, because stress
concentrations are avoided, lattice struts get bet-
ter supported, and their relative length to width
ratio gets smaller. For larger radii, the struts get
thinner, their length to width ratio increases, and
the load factor decreases. For diﬀerent volumes,
the maximum of the smallest buckling load fac-
tor is achieved at diﬀerent radii. The data in

0
0.5
1
0.0276
0.0279
0.0282
0.0321
0.0324
0.0327
0.0330
0.0333
number of ﬁnite elements / 106
Young’s modulus / Pa
Poisson’s ratio
Young’s modulus
Poisson’s ratio
Fig. 6 Homogenized Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio
for diﬀerent ﬁnite element discretizations of an RVE with
a relative volume of 30%.
Fig. 3 suggests that rounding corners with a radius
depending on the volume leads to good buckling
resistance. We note that we only investigated an
uniaxial loading with ¯σ) = (−1, 0, 0), and the
optimal radius might be diﬀerent for other stress
situations. To keep things simple, we thus decided
to use a constant radius of r = 0.05d for our
subsequent calculations.
Finite element convergence on the
microscale
We discretize the microstructure by triangles with
second order shape functions. A convergence study
with respect to the number of ﬁnite elements for
homogenization, i.e., on the microscopic scale, can
be seen in Figs. 6 and 7. Observing that the
convergence graphs are already very ﬂat when
approaching one million elements and taking into
account that we want to keep the ﬁnite element
error in the preprocessing small, we opt to choose
for all subsequent homogenization procedures a
discretization, which results for a density of ρ =
0.5 in approximately one million ﬁnite elements
per RVE. Geometries corresponding to lower den-
sities are resolved using slightly less elements.
Given this number of ﬁnite elements, a single anal-
ysis is usually completed within a few minutes on
a standard work station.
Choice of RVE size
Asymptotic homogenization can only detect high-
frequency modes, i.e., modes with a wave length
that is smaller than the size of the representa-
tive volume element. However, buckling modes
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.0274
0.0276
0.0278
0.0280
0.0282
0.0284
number of ﬁnite elements / 106
buckling load factor / -
buckling load factor
Fig. 7 Homogenized buckling load factor for diﬀerent
ﬁnite element discretizations of an RVE with a relative
volume of 30%.
might span over more than one cell. To identify
these modes also in a homogeneous lattice struc-
ture, we encompass more than one unit cell in
the RVE. That is, the microstructure is considered
Y
κ -periodic, where κ2 is the number of unit cells
inside the RVE. RVEs containing various unit cells
can be seen in Fig. 8. It is noted that all modes
of an RVE with a given number κ of cell repeti-
tions can also be found using an RVE comprised
of ℓκ×ℓκ unit cells, where ℓis an integer number,
e.g., all modes of a 2 × 2 RVE appear also in the
analysis of a 4 × 4 or 6 × 6 RVE. Using an anal-
ogous argument, modes with periodicity
κ
n1 along
R1 and periodicity
κ
n2 along R2 for n1, n2 ∈N are
captured using a κ×κ RVE. Note that in practice
there is a natural lower bound; this value is given
by the resolution of the underlying ﬁnite element
discretization.
We observe that especially an RVE with only
one unit cell results in quite high homogenized
load factors. This is because the joint of the struts
gets locked in rotation due to the periodicity of
the RVE. In an RVE with more than one cell
and in the analysis of dehomogenized designs in
Section 7.1, joints of lattice structures are free to
rotate (see Fig. 24).
As we are interested in the smallest, i.e., criti-
cal, load factor of the lattice, we pick the minimal
load factor with respect to cell repetitions:
λ(¯σ, ρ) = min
κ∈N λκ(¯σ, ρ)
(22)

x
y
Fig. 8 Diﬀerent RVEs containing 1x1, 2x2, 3x3 and 4x4
unit cells and the coordinate system for homogenization.
In practice, one is not able to perform homogeniza-
tion with κ ∈N cell repetitions, but has to resort
to κ ≤K with an appropriately chosen upper
bound K on the number of cell repetitions. We
would like to stress that for a given cell layout, the
optimal κ ∈{1, 2, . . . , K} cannot, in general, be
determined without testing essentially all choices
and might even vary for ﬁxed stress ¯σ but diﬀerent
volume fractions ρ.
We want to remark that the presented method
of repeating the unit cell within the RVE is anal-
ogous to applying Floquet-Bloch theory with a
special discretization of the Brillouin zone (see
Fig. 9). In Floquet-Bloch theory, periodicity con-
ditions for modes φ are given as
φ(y + Rj) = φ(y)eik⊤Rj,
j = 1, 2,
(23)
where i refers to the complex unity, k is the wave
vector, and y is a location inside a lattice unit
cell (Thomsen et al. 2018). Rather than solving
cell problems with boundary conditions (23) for
all k ∈R2, in practice a number of k vectors
on the boundary of the so called irreducible Bril-
louin zone (IBZ) is selected. This corresponds to
a discretization of the IBZ.
Now, a ( κ
n1 , κ
n2 )-periodic mode with n1, n2 ≤
κ corresponds to a wave vector, which solves the
system

R⊤
1
R⊤
2

k = 2π
κ

n1
n2

.
(24)
With that, we can plot all wave vectors corre-
sponding to modes, covered by our κ × κ RVEs
with κ from 1 to K, into a Floquet-Bloch diagram
with an outline of the IBZ. Doing so for K = 7,
we obtain the result depicted in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9 Wave vectors in the Brillouin zone (see Thomsen
et al. (2018)), which correspond to homogenization with
1 to 7 cell repetitions in an RVE. Only 7 cell problems
have to be solved to capture all modes corresponding to
the marked wave vectors.
We emphasize that the worst-case model pre-
sented in the next Section 4.1 is independent of the
method that is used to obtain the homogenized
buckling load factor.
4.1 Worst-case model
This subsection describes our novel method to
integrate the microscopic buckling load factor on
the macroscopic scale. We stress that it is valid
not only for our exemplary lattice but for any
arbitrary, parameterized microstructure.
Due
to
linearized
buckling
analysis
((16)
to (19)) the homogenized load factor depends
linearly on the macroscopic stress:
λ(¯σ, ρ) =
1
∥¯σ∥min
κ∈N λκ

¯σ
∥¯σ∥, ρ

(25)
That is, homogenization can be conducted with
macroscopic unit stress (in some given norm)
and later, the homogenized load factor has to
be divided by ∥¯σ∥. It is thus suﬃcient to
examine stresses on the unit sphere surface S2
instead of the whole three-dimensional stress space
(σxx, σyy, σxy). We deﬁne
λ : S2 × (0, 1] →R,
λ(¯σ, ρ) = min
κ∈N λκ(¯σ, ρ),
(26)
which assigns a homogenized buckling load fac-
tor to each unit stress combined with a relative
volume.
We use a spherical coordinate system to char-
acterize unit stresses on S2: the zenith reference
(z-axis) is the axis from the origin through the
biaxial compression stress σ = (−1, −1, 0) and

Fig. 10 Representation of unit stresses as a unit sphere
surface (¯σ)xy out of plane axis). Special stress types
form circles (uniaxial/shear stress) or single points (biaxial
stress) on the surface. Unit stresses are parameterized by
spherical coordinates with zenith reference z and azimuthal
reference x.
the azimuth reference (x-axis) is the axis from the
origin through σ = (1, −1, 0) (Fig. 10). In this
coordinate system, biaxial compression and ten-
sion stress conform to north and south pole, while
all pure shear stresses rest on the equator. The
inclination (or latitude if thinking of geographical
coordinates) characterizes the type of stress: the
rotation invariant biaxial compression and tension
stresses conform to poles, and other special types,
e.g., uniaxial and shear stresses form circles on
the unit sphere surface (circle of latitude). The
azimuthal angle (longitude) describes the rotation
of the applied macroscopic stress ¯σ relative to the
RVE. For an additional explanation please refer to
the video in Online Resource 1.
Common literature reduces the stress space
even further. Under the assumption of isotropic
buckling behavior, only biaxial loading without
shearing component but varying the σxx
σyy -ratio is
investigated, or uniaxial loading with all possi-
ble load orientations relative to the investigated
microstructure is applied (Bluhm et al. 2020).
In contrast, we compute the buckling yield sur-
face for the whole unit stress surface S2. Thus,
0◦
30◦
60◦
90◦
120◦
150◦
180◦
210◦
240◦
270◦
300◦
330◦
10−3 10−2 10−1 100
x
biaxial compression
uniaxial compression
shear
uniaxial tension
Fig. 11 Homogenized buckling load factors for an RVE
with 3x3 unit cell repetitions and a relative volume of 30%.
Note the logarithmic scaling of the radial axis. The dis-
played angle is the azimuthal angle from the spherical ref-
erence coordinate system (see Fig. 10) and corresponds to
the rotation of the stress around the RVE. The symmetry
of the unit cell is reﬂected in the load factors.
our method is applicable to arbitrary, parameter-
ized microstructures with isotropic or anisotropic
buckling properties.
The homogenized load factors for uniaxial
compression, biaxial compression and shear stress
for an RVE with a relative volume of 30% and
three cell repetitions are shown in Fig. 11. We can
clearly see that the symmetry of the unit lattice
cell is reﬂected in the load factors. The shape of
the uniaxial loading case matches very well with
results by Bluhm et al. (2020).
Next, we coalesce all data in a worst-case
model. Having evaluated homogenized load factors
for diﬀerent cell repetitions κ ∈N and all stresses
on the unit stress sphere ¯σ ∈S2, i.e., for all stress
types and directions, we select the smallest buck-
ling load factor with respect to all unit stresses
and number of cell repetitions:
λwc : (0, 1] →R,
λwc(ρ) = min
¯σ∈S2,
κ∈N
λκ(¯σ, ρ)
(27)
This worst-case model depends only on the local
volume fraction and no longer on the local stress
type or direction. We note that in practice the unit

sphere is discretized and the number of cell repeti-
tions bounded from above. The worst case is thus
only a worst case with respect to the discretiza-
tion resolution and maximal cell repetitions. We
found, however, that the homogenized buckling
load factors for our exemplary lattice cell have
high regularity with respect to the stress variable.
If homogenized load factors were obtained via
Floquet-Bloch theory (Neves et al. 2002a) instead
of using diﬀerent cell repetitions, (27) would con-
tain a minimization over all possible wave vec-
tors k in the Brillouin zone B in lieu of cell
repetitions:
λwc(ρ) = min
¯σ∈S2,
k∈B
λk(¯σ, ρ)
(28)
4.2 Decoupling of micro- and
macroscale
The parameterization of the unit cell allows for
eﬀective decoupling of the micro- and macroscopic
scales (Bendsøe and Kikuchi 1988). That is, we
discretize the parameter space (0, 1] for the rela-
tive volume and precompute homogenized prop-
erties (elasticity tensor from (15) and microscopic
buckling load factor from (16)) for the resulting
parameter set (see also Section 6). For optimiza-
tion of structures on the macroscopic scale, we
then apply an interpolation model to these pre-
computed properties. In other words, we replace
the maps EH (20) and λ (21) by
EI : (0, 1] →S3,
ρ 7→EI(ρ),
(29)
λI : R3 × (0, 1] →R,
(¯σ, ρ) 7→λI(¯σ, ρ),
(30)
where EI and λI are approximations of EH and
λ, respectively.
To construct λI, we interpolate the worst-case
load factors obtained from (27) with respect to the
density variable:
λI
wc : (0, 1] →R,
ρ 7→λI
wc(ρ)
(31)
We obtain the worst-case microscopic buckling
load factor associated with macroscopic stress ¯σ
by dividing by the norm of this stress (see (25)):
λI : R3 × (0, 1] →R,
(¯σ, ρ) 7→
1
∥¯σ∥λI
wc(ρ) (32)
For gradient based optimization, we need
a diﬀerentiable interpolation model. Following
Bendsøe and Kikuchi (1988) we apply a piecewise
interpolation strategy. More precisely, we employ
piecewise cubic Hermite interpolation (Birkhoﬀ
et al. 1968) for both, the homogenized elasticity
tensor (29) as well as the buckling load factor
(31). This scheme yields a continuously diﬀeren-
tiable approximation that is composed of uniquely
deﬁned cubic polynomials between the provided
data points and is exact at these points. However,
other interpolation schemes using, e.g., tangent
or RAMP (Rational Approximation of Material
Properties, Stolpe and Svanberg (2001)) func-
tionals are possible with the downside of lower
accuracy, especially for high porosity values.
Under the piecewise Hermite approach, EI is
constructed by individual interpolation of each
coeﬃcient of the elasticity tensor. The ﬁrst order
derivatives of the homogenized elasticity tensor
and homogenized buckling load factor with respect
to ρ are approximated by ﬁnite diﬀerences. For
the homogenized load factors, we get numerical
issues for high relative volumes. For these volumes,
the unit cell is very resistant to buckling, but
the iterative eigenvalue problem solver (ARPACK,
version 3.7.0 (Lehoucq et al. 1998)) yields artiﬁ-
cial modes, which are caused by the buckling of
individual ﬁnite elements. Hence, we only inter-
polate data points below 60% relative volume. At
the boundary of this sample space, second-order
central ﬁnite diﬀerences are not available, and
thus only quadratic polynomials are used in the
two outer subintervals, i.e., [0, 0.05] and [0.55, 0.6].
For relative volumes above the chosen threshold
of 60% we extrapolate using the quadratic func-
tion obtained for the subinterval [0.55, 0.6]. It is
noted, however, that in the optimized designs pre-
sented in Section 6 microbuckling occurs only for
signiﬁcantly lower densities of 60%. The inter-
polated worst-case model λI
wc for the homoge-
nized microscopic buckling load factor is shown in
Fig. 12. The presented interpolation scheme leads
to suﬃciently diﬀerentiable functions to perform
gradient-based optimization.
The error of the approximated microscopic
buckling load factor λI comprises several individ-
ual errors: the error introduced by ﬁnite element
discretization on the microscopic level to solve the
homogenization problems, the error arising from

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
1
2
3
relative volume / -
buckling load factor / -
interpolation ΛIwc
extrapolation
,
homogenized BLF
Fig. 12 Homogenized worst-case buckling load factors
and the interpolating curve. For high relative volumes,
numerical issues arise (marked by an o). Thus, only values
up to 0.6 are interpolated, and quadratic extrapolation is
applied above.
restriction to the worst case, and the error result-
ing from the interpolation. The discretization and
interpolation errors can easily be controlled by
using ﬁner ﬁnite element meshes on the micro-
scopic scale and ﬁner interpolation grids. Thus,
the worst-case error has the highest signiﬁcance.
We will come back to this when we discuss numer-
ical examples in Section 7.2.
Remark 1 The worst-case error can be avoided if the
worst-case model (27) and univariate interpolation
(31) are replaced by a discretization and trivari-
ate interpolation of (26) in the combined stress and
density space S2 × (0, 1].
In gradient-based optimization context, a contin-
uously diﬀerentiable interpolation scheme is essential.
Possible techniques to realize that for this worst-case
free approach include piecewise cubic Hermite inter-
polation (Birkhoﬀet al. 1968) or interpolation on
sparse grids based on cubic B-splines (Valentin et al.
2020). When applying the worst-case free approach
in a three-dimensional setting, due to the curse of
dimensionality, the diﬀerentiable sparse grid approach
is preferable, as stress has six independent entries
there, which result in ﬁve parameters to represent unit
stress, requiring interpolation to be carried out in a
six dimensional space.
5 Sizing optimization
In this section, we formulate two-scale sizing
optimization problems, which will be solved in
Section 6. In contrast to topology optimization,
where usually a solid/void design is of interest,
we vary the local lattice volume fraction between
10% and 100%. This corresponds to a scaling of
the width of the lattice struts.
We want to achieve structures that are resis-
tant to given loadings both with respect to their
stiﬀness and their buckling strength. To maxi-
mize buckling strength in our two-scale approach,
we have to take into account buckling of the
homogenized overall component as well as buck-
ling of the microstructure. This leads to a multi-
objective optimization problem. For a macroscopic
domain, discretized by M ﬁnite elements, it can
be stated that in terms of mechanical compliance
c, macroscopic load factors Λℓ, ℓ= 1, . . . , L and
microscopic buckling load factors λI
e, e = 1, . . . , M:
max
ρ∈Uad g
 −c, Λ1, . . . , ΛL, λI
1, . . . , λI
M

(ρ).
(33)
The macroscopic load factors are given as solu-
tions of (4) and a prediction for the micro-
scopic buckling load factor λI
e for each element
e is obtained from the interpolated worst-case
model (32). The design variable ρ represents the
local volume fraction of the homogenized lat-
tice. Via the homogenization formulas, this can
be mapped to mechanical properties of a (peri-
odic) microstructure, e.g., elasticity tensor (15)
and buckling load factor (32), which uses (16). g is
an aggregating function and Uad is the admissible
set
Uad =
(
ρ ∈RM : ρmin ≤ρe ≤1,
M
X
e=1
ρe ≤V
)
.
(34)
We include the ﬁrst few L ≪M macroscopic
load factors in the objective to handle potential
mode switching and multiple eigenvalues. Note
that minimization of the compliance corresponds
to maximization of its negative value. We treat the
multi-objective problem (33) with the ϵ-constraint
method (Mavrotas 2009). In this, a point on the
Pareto front is obtained by solving the following
problem:
max
ρ∈Uad ˜g
 Λ1, . . . , ΛL, λI
1, . . . , λI
M

(ρ),
s. t. c(ρ) = c0,
(35)

with an imposed compliance value c0.
We want to maximize the smallest load fac-
tor to achieve a good buckling strength and thus
choose ˜g to be the min function. To get rid of
the non-smooth character of the latter, we apply
a bound formulation of this problem, as suggested
by Bendsøe and Sigmund (2003), and end up with
the following optimization problem:
max
s∈R,ρ∈Uad s,
(36)
s. t. Λℓ(ρ) ≥s,
ℓ= 1, . . . , L
(37)
λI
e(ρ) ≥s,
e = 1, . . . , M
(38)
c(ρ) = c0,
(39)
With the bound formulation we experienced no
problems with multiple eigenvalues or cluster-
ing of eigenvalues in our numerical experiments,
if L was chosen suﬃciently large. Alternatively,
other formulations like a smooth minimum via
Kreisselmeier and Steinhauser (1980) could be
considered.
In Section 6.2, we look at three variations of
this problem:
A) We ignore (38), i.e., we maximize buckling
on the macroscopic scale with a compliance
constraint but do not take buckling on the
microscopic scale into account during opti-
mization.
B) We drop (37), i.e., we only optimize micro-
scopic buckling under a compliance con-
straint but disregard macroscopic buckling.
C) We investigate the problem as given, i.e.,
we maximize buckling on both scales with
respect to a given compliance.
We compute a representation of the Pareto opti-
mal set with 51 Pareto optimized solutions for
each case. For this, we ﬁrst compute a solution to
the pure compliance minimization problem
c∗= arg min
ρ∈Uad
c(ρ).
(40)
Then we solve A) - C) without the compliance
constraint (39) and evaluate the compliance values
cA, cB and cC of the resulting designs to get the
extreme points on the Pareto set. Afterwards, we
discretize the intervals [c∗, cA], [c∗, cB] and [c∗, cC]
equidistantly, e.g., for A)
cj
0 = c∗+ j (cA −c∗)/50,
j = 0, . . . , 50.
(41)
The representation of the Pareto optimal set is
then given by solutions to A) - C) with compliance
constraint c(ρ) = cj
0 in (39).
6 Numerical examples
In this section we present the results of numer-
ical experiments for the two-scale sizing prob-
lems stated in Section 5. We ﬁrst conduct a
pre-study to develop a better understanding of
later optimized designs. After that, solutions to
the multi-objective optimization problems will be
investigated.
To construct the worst-case model, we have
to conduct buckling homogenization with applied
macroscopic stress. For this, we discretize the unit
stress sphere in a spherical coordinate system (see
Section 4.1). We discretize the azimuthal angle,
which describes the rotation of the applied stress
around the RVE, with 5◦steps. Exploiting the
symmetry of our unit cell, it suﬃces to investi-
gate the interval from 0◦to 30◦degrees. For the
inclination, which describes the type of stress, we
choose 11.25◦steps in the interval [0◦, 180◦). We
discretize the relative volume with 0.05 steps and
solve homogenization problems for four, ﬁve, six,
and seven cell repetitions. Modes obtained with
an RVE consisting of two and three unit cells can
also be detected in an RVE with six unit cell rep-
etitions. Likewise, the modes for an 1x1 RVE are
covered by all other RVEs (see Section 4). This
leads to 448 cell problems for each chosen relative
volume and 9408 in total. Note that these simula-
tions are independent of each other and can be run
in parallel. We discretize the microscopic domain
by approximately one million ﬁnite elements per
RVE. As already mentioned in Section 4, the
material properties are given by a Young’s modu-
lus of 10 Pa and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3. It is noted
that the motivation for the choice of the Young’s
modulus was an improved numerical behaviour, in
particular when solving the associated eigenvalue
problem on the microscopic scale. Conversely, the
results are invariant with respect to this choice.
The
eigenvalue
problems
are
solved
by
ARPACK, version 3.7.0 (Lehoucq et al. 1998). To
solve optimization problems, we apply SNOPT,
version 7.2.8 (Gill et al. 2005), which employs a
sequential quadratic programming method.
Now, consider the setting shown in Fig. 13,
left. A rectangular design domain is subject to a

0
1
relative local volume ρ
Fig. 13 Left: macroscopic design setting with loadings
and bearings. Right: the solution of a standard compliance
problem (40) in the design domain (dashed).
pressure load at the top. At the bottom rolling
boundary conditions are applied, i.e., the degree
of freedom in horizontal direction is ﬁxed for all
nodes at the bottom edge. To prevent rigid body
movement, the degree of freedom in vertical direc-
tion is also ﬁxed for the central node at the bottom
edge. This corresponds to Euler’s case of a slen-
der column with ﬁxed/free boundary conditions,
for which the buckling load is given by
fcrit =
π2
4L2 EI,
(42)
where L is the length of the column, E is the elas-
tic modulus and I is the planar second moment of
area. The design domain has a ratio of 1 : 5.2 and
we discretize it with 25 × 130 bi-linear quadrilat-
eral elements (Q4), which is a suﬃcient resolution
for this type of element (compare also (Ferrari
and Sigmund 2019, Fig. 1)). Fig. 13 shows the
optimized design of a mechanical compliance min-
imization with a SIMP (Solid Isotropic Material
with Penalization) material model and a lower
physical design bound of 1e−9.
Fig. 14 Left: buckling mode of a solid column. Center:
column with weak (gray) material and a solid (black) rein-
forcement in endoskeleton conﬁguration. Right: exoskele-
ton conﬁguration. The force is applied via a stiﬀplate at
the top (red).
6.1 Pre-study: Endoskeleton versus
exoskeleton
Before we look into results of the optimization
problems, we perform a study to develop a bet-
ter understanding of later optimized designs. As a
ﬁrst step, consider ρ = 1 on Ω, i.e., solid material
everywhere (Fig. 14, left). Assuming plane stress
conditions, a width and virtual depth of 1 m each,
length 5.2 m and E = 10 Pa, we get fcrit = 0.076 N
from (42). This ﬁts well to our numerical result
of fcrit = 0.074 N. Next, we compare this solid
column with two structures that have the same
weight each as the solid column: weak material
(ρ = 0.4) with either a solid reinforcement (ρ = 1)
of width 0.5 m centered in the middle (endoskele-
ton, Fig. 14, mid) or a solid reinforcement that
ﬂanks the weak material at both sides with width
0.25 m (exoskeleton, Fig. 14, right). The force is
applied at the top boundary via a solid plate with
an elastic modulus that is 100 times higher than
the solid material. As the weight is kept con-
stant, these two structures are wider than the ﬁrst
one (their width is 1.75 m). The critical loads are
0.065 N and 0.22 N, respectively. Due to a larger
second moment of inertia, the exoskeleton shows
superior macroscopic buckling stiﬀness compared
to the endoskeleton. Thus, we expect designs
that are optimized with respect to macroscopic
buckling to exhibit an exoskeleton-like structure.
6.2 Optimization
Next, we investigate the three diﬀerent multi-
objective
optimization
problems
as
given
in
Section 5. Let us brieﬂy note that we did not

run into the problem of switching eigenvalues
in any of the following examples. The material
models are given by the interpolation functions
from Section 4.1 and a density ﬁlter (Borrvall
and Petersson 2001) is applied with a radius of
1.6 times the edge length of a ﬁnite element for
regularization purpose. We choose ρmin = 10%
to obtain easily realizable lattice structures and
apply a global volume constraint with V = 50%
of the design domain’s area.
A) Pure macroscopic load factor
optimization
Ignoring buckling on the microscopic scale, we
maximize the macroscopic load factor (37). The
load factors for diﬀerent values of the compliance
constraint can be seen in Fig. 15. As reference,
we include the value of a topology optimization
with power law (ρ3) and ρmin = 0.001. Selected
designs are shown in Fig. 16. Design A1 results
from a compliance minimization without consider-
ing buckling. Relaxing the compliance constraint
while maximizing the buckling load factor, we only
see a rather small improvement of up to 15% in the
macroscopic load factor. This is due to design A1
having already a rather good macroscopic buck-
ling resistance, as it forms an exoskeleton. Only
in the upper part of the design domain, where the
loaded edge has to be supported, is this alleviated
in favor of a typical branching structure. With
a larger compliance, bound diagonal bars appear
(A2-A4), which are known to increase macroscopic
buckling stability (Bendsøe and Sigmund 2003).
The lower design bound of ρmin = 10% is active
for all designs, see Fig. 15. We conclude from this,
that the load factor could potentially be larger,
i.e., better structures could be obtained, if we
chose a lower ρmin. On the other hand, for very
low ρmin, the problem would no longer be a siz-
ing but rather a topology optimization problem,
which would require special handling (see, e.g.,
Christensen et al. (2022)).
B) Pure microscopic load factor
optimization
In the second optimization problem, we ignore
macroscopic buckling and instead maximize the
smallest microscopic load factor of all ﬁnite ele-
ments (38) subject to a compliance constraint.
1
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
c∗
cA
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
TO A1
A2
A3
A4
compliance / Nm
buckling load factor / -
minimal local volume ρe / -
macro. BLF
min ρe
Fig.
15 Optimized
function
values
considering
only
macroscopic buckling subject to a compliance and a global
volume constraint. As reference, we include a topology
optimization result (TO) for pure compliance minimiza-
tion with ρmin = 0.001 with compliance 1.10 Nm and load
factor 0.014. Selected designs are shown in Fig. 16.
A1
A2
A3
A4
0
1
local volume / -
Fig. 16 Optimized designs for the marked data in Fig. 15.
From left to right the compliance constraint is relaxed and
macroscopic buckling stiﬀness increases through appear-
ance of reinforcing, diagonal structures.
The microscopic buckling load factors are approx-
imated by our worst-case model (32). In Fig. 17,
a substantial improvement of the load factor can
be seen when the compliance constraint is relaxed.
The optimal solution for the problem without
compliance constraint (design B5) is a fully homo-
geneous design (see Fig. 18). Design B5 exhibits
homogeneous stress under the given boundary
conditions, which results in a homogeneous micro-
scopic load factor. Thus, the further we relax the
compliance constraint, the more homogeneous the

1
1.3
1.6
1.9
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
c∗
cB
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
compliance / Nm
buckling load factor / -
minimal local volume ρe / -
micro. BLF
min ρe
Fig.
17 Optimized
function
values
considering
only
microscopic buckling subject to a compliance and a global
volume constraint. The optimized designs show increasing
minimal local volume (see also Fig. 18), which yields better
local buckling resistance.
B2
B3
B4
B5
0
1
local volume / -
Fig. 18 Optimized designs for the marked data in Fig. 17.
Design B1 equals A1 in Fig. 16. B5 is pure maximization
of microscopic buckling without compliance constraint and
yields a homogeneous design.
optimized design becomes. First, the branching
structure at the top of design B1=A1 is replaced
by lattice with high density (B2,B3), then the load
carrying skeleton vanishes (B4,B5). The jumps in
the minimal volume in Fig. 17 can be explained by
design changes and the discretization of the design
domain, e.g., between B3 and B4, the solid parts
on the left and right edge each become one ﬁnite
element thinner, which leads to a diﬀerent stress
distribution in the whole structure.
C) Simultaneous optimization of pure
macro- and microscopic load factors
The obtained values for the simultaneous opti-
mization of both macroscopic and microscopic
buckling load factors (36)-(39) can be seen in
Fig. 19. As reference, the values of a topology
optimization (TO) with ρ = 0.001 are given. To
achieve a stiﬀ(small compliance) design, thick
solid structures are needed. Little material is left
for the lattice part, which results in low local
volume and a small minimal microscopic buck-
ling load factor. Hence, only (38) and (39) are
active and (37) remains inactive. For less restric-
tive (larger) compliance bounds, less solid material
is necessary and material is redistributed to the
lattice region (C2). Thus, the microscopic buck-
ling load factor can be improved. When it reaches
the value of the macroscopic one, (37) becomes
active (C3). Therefore, raising only the micro-
scopic buckling load factor further, i.e., steering
towards homogeneous design as in B, yields no
improvement in the objective, as the macroscopic
load factor will deﬁne the value of the slack vari-
able. For this reason, both micro- and macroscopic
buckling load factors are raised simultaneously:
the ﬁrst by increasing the lattice density especially
in the upper region of the design domain and the
second by stiﬀening the exoskeleton (C4,C5).
The
decreasing
minimal
local
volume
in
Fig. 19 for more relaxed compliance appears non-
intuitive. In Fig. 20, staircase structures on the
solid parts can be seen due to discretization, see,
e.g., C5. The resulting local stress ﬁeld allows
a slightly lower volume for individual ﬁnite ele-
ments, while preserving the microscopic buckling
load factor.
7 Dehomogenization and
validation
In this section, we want to give two distinct com-
parisons: First, we compare the predicted buckling
behavior with high-resolution numerical analyses
of dehomogenized designs. Second, we validate the
worst-case model against a precise microscopic
load factor evaluation.

1
1.3
1.4
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
c∗
cC
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
TO C1
C2 C3 C4
C5
compliance / Nm
buckling load factor / -
minimal local volume ρe / -
macro. BLF
micro. BLF
min ρe
Fig. 19 Optimized function values of concurrent load fac-
tor maximization of pure macro- and pure microscopic
buckling with compliance and volume constraint (36)-(39).
Up to compliance 1.33, only the microscopic buckling load
factor is active. For higher compliance values, the macro-
scopic buckling load factor dominates. Selected designs are
shown in Fig. 20.
C2
C3
C4
C5
0
1
local volume / -
Fig. 20 Optimized designs for the marked data in Fig. 19.
Design C1 equals A1 in Fig. 16. To increase microscopic
buckling resistance, the optimizer reduces lattice porosity.
No diagonal bars appear as they do in the pure macroscopic
buckling optimization, since the lattice already provides
good macroscopic buckling resistance. Due to discretiza-
tion, steps can be seen on the solid parts, as marked in C5
by white ellipses.
7.1 Performance of dehomogenized
designs
The number of lattice cells for dehomogenization
of optimized results is chosen independently of
the ﬁnite element resolution of the macroscopic
model (cf. Fig. 13). To realize this, we proceed as
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22
0.045
0.055
0.06
C4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
C4
number of horizontal lattice cells
load factor / -
compliance / Nm
macro. BLF
micro. BLF
interior LF
compliance
Fig. 21 Dehomogenization of design C4 with increasing
number of lattice cells. For the interior microscopic load
factor, we searched for the ﬁrst buckling mode that has
no deﬂection at the boundary. The macroscopic buckling
load factor matches our prediction well; the microscopic
and the interior load factors are better than predicted by
the worst-case model (cf. Fig. 19).
follows: First, the optimized density ﬁeld ρ is inter-
polated and the number of lattice cells is chosen.
Then, an evaluation of this ﬁeld at each lattice
cell’s center deﬁnes the width of the correspond-
ing lattice struts. Note that our dehomogenization
procedure is volume preserving, i.e., all dehomog-
enized designs have a volume of V = 50% of the
design domain’s area. Dehomogenized designs are
shown in Figs. 22 and 23.
Inﬂuence of cell size
We compare dehomogenizations with diﬀerent cell
sizes for design C4 from Fig. 20. We investigate
diﬀerent buckling load factors: the one associated
with a macroscopic buckling mode, i.e., deﬂec-
tion of the structure as a whole (low-frequency),
and the one associated with a microscopic mode,
i.e., deﬂection of the lattice (high-frequency). As
expected, the predicted macroscopic buckling load
factor is met better with a higher number of lat-
tice cells (see Fig. 21). The microscopic buckling
load factor stems from modes at the boundary
(Fig. 23). These modes cannot be approximated
well by homogenization theory, which ignores
boundary eﬀects. We therefore also search for the
smallest load factor associated with an interior
mode, i.e., a mode, that does not exhibit deﬂection
at the structure’s boundary (cf. Fig. 23). In order
to avoid buckling of the microstructure occurring
at the structural boundary, a coating strategy as

Fig. 22 Dehomogenization of design C4 with 6 (left) and
12 (right) cells in horizontal direction with visualized pre-
buckling displacement. The horizontal struts at the top face
where the pressure load is applied exhibit sag, which is
reduced for a higher number of cells.
suggested by Christensen et al. (2022) may be
pursued.
In the considered example, the cell size has
almost no inﬂuence on this interior load factor.
This might diﬀer for other examples. Zooms for
interior microscopic buckling modes are given in
Fig. 24.
As can be seen in Fig. 21, the compliance tends
to decrease with smaller cell size. The observed
increase for 22 lattice cells compared to 20 is pre-
sumably caused by discretization eﬀects. Fig. 22
shows that the displacement under the applied
pressure load has a wave shape, where horizon-
tal lattice struts at the top face sag between their
diagonal supports. The more cells we have, the
better these struts are supported, and thus the
compliance is reduced.
Comparison between homogenized and
dehomogenized designs
Next, we compare the homogenized design C4 with
its dehomogenized counterpart with 20 cells in a
horizontal direction. For this design, we have a
clear separation of length scales and only a small
homogenization error. The macroscopic load fac-
tor is determined to be 0.0507 and diﬀers by less
Fig. 23 Diﬀerent buckling modes for design C4 deho-
mogenized with eight lattice cells (cf. Fig. 21). Left: ﬁrst
macroscopic mode. Center: ﬁrst microscopic mode. Right:
ﬁrst interior mode.
Fig. 24 Zoom of ﬁrst interior buckling mode of design C4
dehomogenized with 8 (left), 12 (middle) and 16 (right)
lattice cells (cf. Fig. 21).
than 1% from the predicted macroscopic load fac-
tor of 0.0511 in the optimized homogenized design.
A gap of 10% exists between the interior micro-
scopic load factor of the dehomogenized design
of 0.0563 and the predicted one of 0.0511. This
is expected, as the predicted microscopic load
factor is based on our worst-case model, which
assumes the worst stress type and orientation
(see Section 4.1). Note that the predicted micro-
scopic buckling load factor is smaller than the
microscopic buckling load factor, and hence our
worst-case model acts as a safeguard against pure
microscopic buckling in this example. Of course,
such an observation is generally only valid up to

Fig. 25 Left: microscopic buckling load factor predicted
by the worst-case model. Right: visualization of a posteriori
homogenized microscopic buckling load factor. Load factors
are thresholded at 0.1. The marked ﬁnite element in the
upper region corresponds roughly to the center of the mode
from Fig. 24. The a posteriori homogenized buckling load
factor of this element is 13% larger than predicted and
diﬀers less than 3% from the dehomogenized design.
remaining discretization and interpolation errors
as well as the error introduced by homogenization.
7.2 Impact of worst-case model
Next, we investigate the gap between the load
factor predicted by the worst-case model and
the interior load factor obtained from the deho-
mogenized design. For all ﬁnite elements in the
lattice region of design C4, we perform a posteriori
homogenization by evaluation of (26). We extract
the local relative volume and create RVEs with
κ ∈{4, 5, 6, 7} unit cell repetitions. Then, we con-
duct homogenization (Section 3) of the buckling
load factor for each κ with the ”real” macroscopic
stress taken from the optimized design using (18)
and (19) and use the minimal value with respect
to κ. The resulting microscopic load factors are
shown in Fig. 25. The mean relative diﬀerence
between predicted and a posteriori load factor for
all of the validated ﬁnite elements is 18%, with a
standard deviation of 0.079.
Fig. 26 Setting for shear stress example, consisting of
homogenized lattice with 50% porosity. The color shows the
norm of the resulting mechanical stress. Region C exhibits
shear, region A uniaxial tension, and region B uniaxial
compression stress.
The marked element in Fig. 25 complies with
the center of the interior microscopic mode in
the dehomogenized design. For this element, the
a posteriori homogenized buckling load factor is
0.0578, which diﬀers less than 3% from the inte-
rior microscopic load factor of the dehomogenized
design. This rather small diﬀerence demonstrates
that homogenization is a valid tool for predicting
microscopic buckling behavior.
The a posteriori homogenized buckling load
factor for the mentioned element is 13% larger
than predicted by the worst-case model. This can
be explained by Fig. 11. The macroscopic stress for
the chosen ﬁnite element, which is extracted from
the macroscopic analysis, is uniaxial and acts in
vertical direction. Thus, the a posteriori load fac-
tor corresponds to the point on the uniaxial curve
at 90◦, which is 15% larger than the biaxial value.
Example with tension, compression,
and shear stress
In the previously considered example, we mostly
observe uniaxial compression stress. Next, we
want to examine an example with compression,
tension, and shear stress. For this, consider the
setting shown in Fig. 26: A bow-tie shaped domain
is ﬁxed at the left edge in both degrees of free-
dom. At the right edge, movement in a horizontal
direction is prevented and a force is pulling down-
wards. We simulate the behavior of a homogenized
lattice with a constant relative local volume, i.e.,

C
A
A
B
B
Fig. 27 Microscopic buckling load factors obtained via
our worst-case model.
ρe = 0.5 for all e = 1, . . . , M. This leads to pure
shear stress in the center of the domain, marked
by C, uniaxial tension stress in the regions marked
with A, and uniaxial compression stress in regions
marked with B.
In Fig. 27 we see, that the microscopic buckling
load factor, which is obtained from our worst-
case model, has its minimal value in regions A
and B where the highest stress occurs. This high-
lights a drawback of the worst-case approach: the
model cannot distinguish between tension and
compression stress. This is because it is based
on a minimization over all unit stresses and only
depends on the local volume fraction and local
stress magnitude but not on stress type or direc-
tion (cf. (27)). As for our exemplary lattice, the
computed load factors for compression stress are
consistently smaller than for tension stress (see
also (Christensen et al. 2022, Fig. 3) for a con-
ﬁrmation of this observation), and buckling load
factors will always be underestimated by the
model in regions of tension stress. This results
in higher lattice volume fraction than actually
necessary to prevent local buckling at these loca-
tions. Due to this expendable lattice over-sizing,
microscopic buckling is not observed at the corre-
sponding locations for the dehomogenized design,
although predicted by the worst-case model.
As in the previous example, we conduct a
posteriori homogenization with the ”real” macro-
scopic stress taken from the simulated design in
Fig. 26. Fig. 28 shows that in the region of com-
pression stress (B), the error of the prediction is
quite low, but in the region of tension stress (A),
the worst-case model clearly underestimates the
C
A
A
B
B
a posteriori load factor / -
relative error / -
Fig. 28 Left: microscopic buckling load factors obtained
by a posteriori homogenization with the “real” macroscopic
stress. Right: relative diﬀerence of load factors predicted
by the worst-case model compared with a posteriori load
factors. The center region C is subject to pure shear stress
and has a predicted load factor, which is 50% smaller than
the one obtained by a posteriori homogenization.
actual load factor. For an exemplary ﬁnite element
in the marked region C, the predicted buckling
load factor is 0.100, while the homogenized value is
0.154. Thus, this element actually has 50% higher
buckling strength than predicted by the worst-case
model. This can be explained by Fig. 29. The load
factor for shear stress at 45◦, which is the act-
ing stress in the inspected element, is around 50%
larger than the load factor for biaxial stress, on
which our worst-case model is based. This expla-
nation also leads to a simple a priori error estimate
for the worst-case model: if we know the type
of stress, the error is bounded by the diﬀerence
between the maximal load factor on the curve for
the speciﬁc stress type and the load factor for
biaxial stress.
For this last example, we showed a homoge-
neous design with non-homogeneous microscopic
buckling load factor. In a simultaneous optimiza-
tion of both macro- and microscopic buckling
(cf. problem C in Section 5), only the microscopic
constraint is active as the structure exhibits a
comparatively high macroscopic buckling load fac-
tor. Optimization with respect to only microscopic
buckling (problem B) leads to non-homogeneous
lattice with homogeneous microscopic buckling
load factor. For this optimized design, similar
deviations in the predicted worst case versus the
a posteriori buckling load factor have been found
in regions that exhibit shear stress.

0◦
30◦
60◦
90◦
120◦
150◦
180◦
210◦
240◦
270◦
300◦
330◦
0.00
0.05
x
biaxial compression
uniaxial compression
shear
Fig. 29 Homogenized buckling load factors for an RVE
with 3x3 unit cell repetitions and a relative volume of 30%
(cf. Fig. 11). In region C of our example (Fig. 26), we have
shear stress acting at an angle of 45◦. The buckling load
factor for this stress situation (marked by a circle) is around
50% larger than the one for biaxial compression stress.
We recall that our worst-case model acts as a
safeguard against pure microscopic buckling. The
possibly excessive underestimation of the micro-
scopic buckling load factor can lead to oversized
lattice struts. This can be overcome by replacing
the worst-case approach with other interpolation
models, e.g., a C1-Interpolation in the three-
dimensional parameter space (ρ, ¯σ)|¯σ∈S2. How-
ever, this comes with additional computational
eﬀort for the worst-case model and, as mentioned
in Remark 1 in Section 4.1, requires sophisticated
interpolation schemes if the proposed method is
applied for three-dimensional structures, as the
parameter space will become higher dimensional.
8 Conclusion
We presented a method to perform two-scale opti-
mization of lattice structures while accounting for
buckling on both scales using asymptotic homog-
enization. Based on a parameterization of our
chosen lattice structure, we obtained homogenized
elastic and buckling properties. We constructed
a worst-case model for the homogenized buckling
load factor (Section 4.1). Both elastic and buck-
ling characteristics were upscaled by individual,
continuously diﬀerentiable interpolation models.
We provided numerical examples for optimization
of only macroscopic or microscopic buckling and
simultaneous optimization of both.
We demonstrated that our method to obtain
homogenized properties is equivalent to a special
discretization of the Brillouin zone in Floquet-
Bloch theory. We showed that rounding corners
can have a considerable inﬂuence on the buck-
ling strength of lattices, as it prevents stress
concentrations.
We compared the performance of optimized
designs predicted by the worst-case model with
their dehomogenized counterparts. Compliance
and macroscopic buckling were predicted very
well; the predicted microscopic buckling load fac-
tor was conservative. We explained the reason
for a possible underestimation and how this can
be avoided by replacing the worst-case model by
interpolation in the whole parameter space. A pos-
teriori homogenization matched dehomogenized
results quite well. This shows that homogenization
is a viable tool to upscale the buckling behavior
of lattice structures.
Although
we
limit
ourselves
to
a
two-
dimensional setting in this article, an extension
to three dimensions is straight forward. Further
research could include the combination of lattice,
solid, and void design in optimization problems
while accounting for manufacturing constraints.
Acknowledgments.
Funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) – Project-ID 61375930 – SFB 814 -
”Additive Manufacturing” TP C02.
Declarations
Competing interests On behalf of all authors, the
corresponding author states that there is no
conﬂict of interest.
Replication of results The numerical implementa-
tion of the presented approach is based on
and extends the open-source ﬁnite element
package openCFS (Verein zur F¨orderung der
Software openCFS). The presented numeri-
cal examples can be reproduced following the
general openCFS instructions. Examples on
how to conduct homogenization and buck-
ling analysis are provided in its Testsuite.
Finite element meshes have been generated
by Coreform Cubit 2022.4 (Coreform LLC).
Additional scripts for post-processing of the

homogenized data are readily provided by the
authors on request.
References
Allaire G, Francfort G (1993) A numerical algo-
rithm for topology and shape optimization.
In: Topology design of structures. Springer, p
239–248
Allaire G, Kohn RV (1993) Explicit optimal
bounds on the elastic energy of a two-phase
composite in two space dimensions. Quarterly
of Applied Mathematics 51(4):675–699
Allaire G, Bonnetier E, Francfort G, et al. (1997)
Shape
optimization
by
the
homogenization
method. Numerische Mathematik 76(1):27–68.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s002110050253
Andersen MN, Wang F, Sigmund O (2021) On
the competition for ultimately stiﬀand strong
architected
materials.
Materials
&
Design
198:109,356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.
2020.109356
Andersen MN, Wang Y, Wang F, et al. (2022)
Buckling and yield strength estimation of archi-
tected materials under arbitrary loads. Inter-
national Journal of Solids and Structures p
111842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.2022.
111842
Behrou R, LotﬁR, Carstensen JV, et al. (2021)
Revisiting element removal for density-based
structural topology optimization with rein-
troduction by heaviside projection. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing 380:113,799. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.
2021.113799
Bendsøe
MP,
Kikuchi
N
(1988)
Gener-
ating
optimal
topologies
in
structural
design
using
a
homogenization
method.
Computer
methods
in
applied
mechan-
ics
and
engineering
71(2):197–224.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-7825(88)90086-2
Bendsøe MP, Sigmund O (2003) Topology opti-
mization: theory, methods, and applications.
Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin Hei-
delberg New York
BirkhoﬀG, Schultz MH, Varga RS (1968) Piece-
wise hermite interpolation in one and two vari-
ables with applications to partial diﬀerential
equations. Numer Math 11(3):232–256
Bluhm GL, Sigmund O, Wang F, et al. (2020)
Nonlinear compressive stability of hyperelastic
2d lattices at ﬁnite volume fractions. Journal of
the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 137:103,851
Borrvall T, Petersson J (2001) Topology optimiza-
tion using regularized intermediate density con-
trol. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering 190(37-38):4911–4928. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0045-7825(00)00356-X
Bruyneel M, Colson B, Remouchamps A (2008)
Discussion on some convergence problems in
buckling optimisation. Structural and Multidis-
ciplinary Optimization 35(2):181–186. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00158-007-0129-z
Christensen CF, Wang F, Sigmund O (2022) Mul-
tiscale topology optimization considering local
and global buckling response. arXiv preprint
arXiv:221011477
Clausen A, Aage N, Sigmund O (2016) Exploit-
ing additive manufacturing inﬁll in topology
optimization for improved buckling load. Engi-
neering 2(2):250–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.ENG.2016.02.006
Clausen T (1851) ¨Uber die form architektonis-
cher s¨aulen. Bull cl, Physico Math Acad St
P´etersbourg 9:369–380
Coreform LLC, Orem, UT Coreform cubit. https:
//coreform.com/products/coreform-cubit/
Dalklint A, Wallin M, Tortorelli DA (2020)
Eigenfrequency constrained topology optimiza-
tion of ﬁnite strain hyperelastic structures.
Structural
and
Multidisciplinary
Optimiza-
tion 61(6):2577–2594. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00158-020-02557-9
Dunning PD, Ovtchinnikov E, Scott J, et al.
(2016) Level-set topology optimization with
many
linear
buckling
constraints
using
an
eﬃcient and robust eigensolver. International

Journal
for
Numerical
Methods
in
Engi-
neering 107(12):1029–1053. https://doi.org/10.
1002/nme.5203
Ferrari F, Sigmund O (2019) Revisiting topol-
ogy optimization with buckling constraints.
Structural
and
Multidisciplinary
Optimiza-
tion 59(5):1401–1415. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00158-019-02253-3
Ferrari F, Sigmund O (2020) Towards solving
large-scale topology optimization problems with
buckling constraints at the cost of linear anal-
yses. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering 363:112,911. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cma.2020.112911
Ferrer A, Geoﬀroy-Donders P, Allaire G (2021)
Stress
minimization
for
lattice
structures.
part
i:
Micro-structure
design.
Philosophi-
cal
Transactions
of
the
Royal
Society
A
379(2201):20200,109. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2020.0109
Gao X, Ma H (2015) Topology optimization
of continuum structures under buckling con-
straints.
Computers
&
Structures
157:142–
152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2015.
05.020
Giele R, Groen J, Aage N, et al. (2021) On
approaches for avoiding low-stiﬀness regions in
variable thickness sheet and homogenization-
based topology optimization. Structural and
Multidisciplinary Optimization 64(1):39–52
Gill PE, Murray W, Saunders MA (2005) Snopt:
An sqp algorithm for large-scale constrained
optimization. SIAM review 47(1):99–131. https:
//doi.org/10.1137/S0036144504446096
Huang N, Sheu CY (1968) Optimal design of an
elastic column of thin-walled cross section. Jour-
nal of Applied Mechanics 35(2):285–288. https:
//doi.org/10.1115/1.3601193
Keller JB (1960) The shape of the strongest
column.
Archive
for
Rational
Mechan-
ics
and
Analysis
5(1):275–285.
https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF00252909
Khot N, Venkayya V, Berke L (1976) Optimum
structural design with stability constraints.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Engineering 10(5):1097–1114. https://doi.org/
10.1002/nme.1620100510
Kreisselmeier G, Steinhauser R (1980) Systematic
control design by optimizing a vector perfor-
mance index. In: Computer aided design of
control systems. Elsevier, p 113–117
Larsen S, Sigmund O, Groen J (2018) Opti-
mal truss and frame design from projected
homogenization-based topology optimization.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
57(4):1461–1474
Lehoucq
RB,
Sorensen
DC,
Yang
C
(1998)
ARPACK users’ guide: solution of large-scale
eigenvalue problems with implicitly restarted
Arnoldi methods. SIAM, Philadelphia
Mavrotas G (2009) Eﬀective implementation of
the
ε-constraint
method
in
multi-objective
mathematical programming problems. Applied
mathematics and computation 213(2):455–465.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2009.03.037
Nˇemec I, Trcala M, ˇSevˇc´ık I, et al. (2016) New
formula for geometric stiﬀness matrix calcu-
lation. Journal of Applied Mathematics and
Physics 4(4):733–748. https://doi.org/10.4236/
jamp.2016.44084
Neves M, Rodrigues H, Guedes J (1995) Gen-
eralized topology design of structures with
a
buckling
load
criterion.
Structural
opti-
mization 10(2):71–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF01743533
Neves MM (2019) Symbolic computation to derive
a linear-elastic buckling theory for solids with
periodic microstructure. International Journal
for Computational Methods in Engineering Sci-
ence and Mechanics 20(6):523–539
Neves MM, Sigmund O, Bendsøe M (2002a)
Topology optimization of periodic microstruc-
tures with a buckling criteria. Vienna University
of Technology

Neves MM, Sigmund O, Bendsøe MP (2002b)
Topology optimization of periodic microstruc-
tures
with
a
penalization
of
highly
local-
ized buckling modes. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering 54(6):809–
834. https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.449
Pedersen NL (2000) Maximization of eigenval-
ues using topology optimization. Structural
and multidisciplinary optimization 20(1):2–11.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s001580050130
Rahman O, Uddin KZ, Muthulingam J, et al.
(2022) Density-graded cellular solids: Mechan-
ics, fabrication, and applications. Advanced
Engineering Materials 24(1):2100,646. https://
doi.org/10.1002/adem.202100646
Rodrigues HC, Guedes J, Bendsøe MP (1995) Nec-
essary conditions for optimal design of struc-
tures with a nonsmooth eigenvalue based crite-
rion. Structural optimization 9(1):52–56. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF01742645
Seyranian AP, Lund E, OlhoﬀN (1994) Multiple
eigenvalues in structural optimization problems.
Structural optimization 8(4):207–227. https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF01742705
Stolpe M, Svanberg K (2001) An alternative
interpolation scheme for minimum compliance
topology optimization. Structural and Multi-
disciplinary Optimization 22(2):116–124. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s001580100129
Tadjbakhsh I, Keller J (1962) Strongest columns
and isoperimetric inequalities for eigenvalues.
Journal of Applied Mechanics 29(1):159–164.
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3636448
Thomsen CR, Wang F, Sigmund O (2018) Buck-
ling strength topology optimization of 2d peri-
odic materials based on linearized bifurca-
tion analysis. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 339:115–136. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2018.04.031
Valentin J, H¨ubner D, Stingl M, et al. (2020)
Gradient-based two-scale topology optimization
with b-splines on sparse grids. SIAM Journal
on Scientiﬁc Computing 42(4):B1092–B1114.
https://doi.org/10.1137/19M128822X
Verein zur F¨orderung der Software openCFS
opencfs. https://opencfs.org/
Wang X, Zhu L, Sun L, et al. (2021) Optimiza-
tion of graded ﬁlleted lattice structures subject
to yield and buckling constraints. Materials &
Design 206:109,746. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
matdes.2021.109746
Wu J, Sigmund O, Groen JP (2021) Topology
optimization of multi-scale structures: a review.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization
63(3):1455–1480
Zienkiewicz OC, Taylor RL, Zhu JZ (2005) The
ﬁnite element method: its basis and fundamen-
tals. Elsevier, Amsterdam i.a.
