 
1
Hong Kong Baptist University 
 
Department of Geography 
 
 
 
GEOG 4017 Geographical Information Systems 
2022-2023 Semester 2 
Final Course Report 
Instructor: Dr. Song Jun 
 
 
 
Topic:  
Integrating GIS into Hong Kong Secondary School Geography Curriculum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Student Name: Lai Yin Ching 
Student ID: 20227485 
Word Count: 3398 
 

2 
 
Integrating GIS into Hong Kong Secondary School Geography Curriculum 
 
Abstract: 
Hong Kong’ senior geography curriculum has included GIS since the early 2000s. 
However, GIS in secondary schools does not play a significant role in Hong Kong 
secondary geography education. Analyzing GIS benefits by literature review, it is 
believed that GIS should be included in both the senior and junior geography 
curriculum. Moreover, the literature review indicates that without clear instruction 
from the Hong Kong Education Bureau (EDB), low preparedness of Hong Kong 
geography teachers, and unsupportive attitudes from academia and textbook 
publishers, GIS cannot be implemented in secondary schools of Hong Kong. 
Therefore, suggestions are made for the EDB, geography teachers, academia and 
textbook publishers to facilitate GIS involvement in senior and junior geography 
curriculums. The EDB can develop clear guidelines for teachers, academia and 
textbook publishers’ references, and offer student-centered GIS educational courses 
for teachers. It is important for teachers to be prepared for advanced GIS technology 
and to even learn along with students. Academics and textbook publishers can provide 
free GIS maps targeted at Hong Kong’ junior and senior geography curriculums. 
Although the report provides brief information towards the GIS implementation in 
Hong Kong geography education, it can inspire new ideas from other scholars to 
facilitate the usage of GIS in Hong Kong secondary school geography teaching. 
 
Keywords: GIS, Hong Kong, Geography Education, Secondary Schools,  
Geography Curriculum, Junior & Senior. 
 
1. Introduction 
GIS (Geographic Information System), one of the academic fields in geospatial 
technology, is a computer system for inputting, collecting, storing, processing, 
displaying, presenting, and analyzing spatial data (Lam et al, 2009). The combination 

3 
 
of geographical information and computer technology has made GIS widely used in a 
variety of industries, from scientific investigations to city planning to education, for 
any purpose. GIS demand increases significantly in the era of artificial intelligence 
and technology. 
 
2. Research Gaps  
While other countries and regions, for instance the United Kingdom, Turkish and 
Kazakhstan, have actively involved GIS in their high schools’ geography curriculum, 
the Hong Kong Education Bureau (EDB) seems not to have an active role in 
promoting GIS in high schools and investigating the essential and valuable skill into 
its high school curriculum. Although the EDB highly emphasizes spatial analysis in 
both junior and senior geography curriculum, there are no guidelines or explanations 
on how to integrate GIS in geography teaching. GIS is even not mentioned in the 
junior geography curriculum. In addition, I discovered that only a few scholars have 
investigated integrating GIS into Hong Kong high school geography curriculum in 
depth. Most scholars investigate students’ and teacher attitudes towards GIS and its 
advantages. Despite some scholar papers relating to the integration of GIS into the 
high school geography curriculum, those scholar papers were published in the early 
2000s, which the secondary school geography curriculum has changed from the Hong 
Kong Certificate of Education Examination (HKCEE) and Hong Kong Advanced 
Level Examination (HKAL) to Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education 
Examination (HKDSE).  
 
3. Research Topic  
Based on the research gap, I would like to investigate GIS integration into the Hong 
Kong Secondary School Geography Curriculum from three perspectives, including 
the Education Bureau, teachers, and academia. Following the literature review, we 
will analyze three perspectives from the Education Bureau, teachers, and academia, as 
well as textbook publishers, to find out how GIS can be integrated into geography 

4 
 
teaching.   
 
4. Literature Review 
 
4.1 Introductory of Literature Review 
A modern world is characterized by technological advancements, changing world 
conditions, and people’ interconnectedness. All of those are largely focused on spatial 
relationships. Thus, GIS benefits should be demonstrable, which benefits students’ 
learning and career pathways. Moreover, the second part of the literature review 
discusses the role of GIS in educational affairs in Hong Kong and other regions and 
countries. As part of the analysis part, possible suggestions will be provided for 
integrating GIS into Hong Kong’ high school curriculum. 
 
4.2 Developing Geographic Thinking 
GIS can develop students’ geographical thinking, which further consolidates 
geography knowledge. GIS emphasizes spatial analysis, which uses maps to visualize 
region patterns and distributions. Through map reading, all the information can be 
clearly outlined. Different interactive layers and categories can also be added to 
web-based or software-based maps (Demeuov et al, 2021). Students can tick or untick 
the selected topics for comparison, classification, and analysis, which allows them to 
learn geography patterns and distributions in an interactive way. For example, when 
teaching about deforestation and human activities. GIS can show where deforestation 
occurs, how human activities keep expanding, and how serious is global deforestation? 
Aside from reading those maps before and after deforestation, students also need to 
analyze their responses by themselves, rather than simply memorizing knowledge 
from textbooks, which encourages them to examine maps and data in relation to cause 
and effect (Walshe, 2018). In addition, GIS enables students to use their creativity to 
solve problems, and it facilitates their understanding of geography as well (Industry 
Focus, 2015). GIS can be incorporated into lessons as homework and projects to 

5 
 
require students to provide solutions to landslides using GIS. Students can think 
outside the box. Combining with the knowledge they learnt and urban problems in 
their living environment, students can use GIS to demonstrate possible solutions 
(Stevens, 2021). For example, contributing masonry retaining walls and installing soil 
nails to solve landslides. This can facilitate geography creative thinking skills and put 
geography knowledge into practice, which further consolidates geography knowledge. 
Therefore, GIS can facilitate students geographic thinking and reinforce their 
knowledge. 
 
4.3 Increasing Motivation in Geography Lessons 
GIS motivates students to engage in and participate in geography lessons. Arthvini 
(2010) and Stevens (2021) agreed that GIS has positive effects on students’  
motivation, attitude, and interpersonal skills. As GIS is considered high-level 
educational software in high schools, a majority of high school students have not tried 
GIS before. Using GIS is a new way to view the world from their own perspective. 
Additionally, GIS questions can relate to students’ living environment, bringing 
knowledge to practice. This can motivate students to learn geography and explore and 
investigate the whole world. Walshe (2018) suggests local places around the student’ 
residence and school can be implemented in junior school. For instance, when 
teaching urban planning in junior geography, students can use GIS for identifying 
different types of land use around their homes and schools. They may be interested in 
the pattern of city development. Within their living circle, which motivates them to 
learn more about Hong Kong’ city pattern, and even study geography in high schools 
and universities (Chiu, 2017). By using GIS to engage students in lessons, teachers 
can activate the learning atmosphere in classrooms and ignite the passion and 
enthusiasm for geography (Kemp et al, 1992). In turn, integrating GIS into education 
industry increases students’ motivation to study geography. 
 
4.4 GIS Involvements in other countries and regions education system 

6 
 
GIS is highly integrated into other countries’ and regions’ geography curricula. A third 
of the geography curriculum of the General Certificate of Secondary Geography 
(GCSG) in the United Kingdom is GIS-based (AQA, 2016). Using GIS, satellite 
images, and different types of geographic representations, students are required to 
analyse and interpret qualitative and quantitative data from primary and secondary 
sources for their field work. Paper-and-pencil exams are also required for 
geographical applications in England, including the application of GIS in reality and 
other forms of geography representation, such as satellite images. Chinese and 
Taiwanese high schools already include GIS in their geography curriculums besides 
the United Kingdom. As stated by the Ministry of Education of the People’ Republic 
of China, the high school geography curriculum includes basic GIS concepts and 
application. Students are engaged in geographical learning by applying a 
student-centered approach to teaching geography through GIS (Lam et al, 2009). In 
addition, Tai Wan’ high school geography curriculum (2018) includes an elective 
topic related to spatial analysis, aiming to develop the importance of spatial 
information skills. The curriculum also incorporates problem-based investigation, for 
instance making theme maps to cover particular geographical issues, provoking 
discussion among students. Other countries and regions have extensively incorporated 
GIS into their geography curriculum.  
 
4.5 GIS Education in Hong Kong High School Geography  
GIS involvement in Hong Kong is not as extensive as other countries and regions (Tse, 
2005). Although GIS has been introduced into Hong Kong’ s Senior Secondary 
Geography curriculum since 2009, the EDB in Hong Kong does not provide 
guidelines and instruction in integrating GIS into the junior or senior secondary 
geography curriculum. 96% of secondary teachers studied GIS in their undergraduate 
studies and attended GIS courses organized by the EDB or local universities. 
However, only 32% of teachers had used GIS before (Lam et al, 2009). 3 sectors, the 
EDB, teachers, and academia and textbook publishers pose barriers to GIS 

7 
 
implementation in Hong Kong geography curriculum. 
 
A challenge is implementing GIS into high school curriculum without clear 
instructions from the EDB. The EDB stated that junior students should be able to 
apply GIS to fieldwork and drawing basic maps (EDB, 2022). Senior students not 
only need to achieve those skills, but they should also be able to make judgments 
through comparing, analyzing, combining, and evaluating geography data with GIS. 
However, the EDB does not explicitly mention integrating GIS into classroom 
teaching (EDB, 2022). Secondary school teachers and textbook publishers do not 
know how to integrate GIS into lessons without the EDB’ clear guidelines. There are 
confusions among teachers and textbook publishers about high school GIS level 
requirements and their relationship with geography topics. In addition, the GIS 
courses organized by the EDB emphasize a skill-based approach in which teachers are 
viewed as being developed from a top-down perspective. Practical knowledge of 
teachers is not taken into account. Thus, teachers not only acquire the skills of 
operating GIS but not involve GIS into practical teaching, which will only have a 
temporary effect. 
 
There is a lack of self-preparedness among teachers in terms of taking on the 
responsibility of promoting GIS in geography curriculum. Nearly all teachers have 
taken GIS courses before. However, many teachers reported they had forgotten most 
of the GIS content on those courses because of the low frequency of GIS usage in 
those courses (Lam et al, 2009). A GIS training course organized by the EDB is 
mostly skill-based, which only teaches teachers about the basics of GIS usage (Chui, 
2017). There is no linkage and relationship between the curriculum topics. In return, 
no teaching experience or tips are provided to teachers for reference. The use of GIS 
in teaching creates a knowledge gap among teachers. This leads teachers to push back 
GIS in classroom teaching. Similarly, teachers have to explore the GIS software by 
themselves due to the lack of useful information provided by the EDB (Tse, 2005). 

8 
 
Due to numerous administrative duties, inconvenient GIS applications, and teaching 
duties at schools, teachers often consider exploring GIS software that takes 
sustainability time and even pushes GIS back to high schools. 
 
Academics and textbook publishers also pose burden in promoting GIS to high 
schools. Basic GIS software, digital data, and supporting educational software are 
needed for using GIS in teaching. Specifically, there is limited digital data suitable for 
the high school geography curriculum. Digital data, including digital maps, were 
expensive and unaffordable for some schools (Lam et al, 2009). The majority of 
teachers over 35 years old have forgotten all the GIS knowledge they learned in their 
undergraduate and teacher training courses, so choosing and processing suitable 
digital maps for their teaching materials is difficult and time-consuming (Lam et al, 
2009). Although academic and textbook publishers strongly encourage teachers to 
include GIS in teaching, no GIS-supported digital data is provided for teachers to use.  
 
5. Joint-Cooperation in GIS implementation in High Schools 
To fully integrate GIS into the high school curriculum, the EDB, teachers, and 
academia and textbook publishers should work together to facilitate GIS 
implementation in secondary geography. The EDB should change the teaching 
method of a GIS training course from a skill-based approach to a student-centered 
approach and provide more digital maps for teachers. Teachers should promote 
learning in context and integrate GIS into their curriculum by applying a growth 
model that emphasizes learning in context. Academia and textbook publishers should 
raise general awareness of GIS by organizing GIS information days. They can 
facilitate GIS implementation in geographical teaching through designing suitable 
levels of digital maps based on geographical curriculum. The following paragraphs 
explain the above suggestions in detail.  
 
 
 

9 
 
5.1 EDB: Policy Formation and Educational Material Providers 
Implementation of GIS in learning is hindered by the unclear role of GIS in the 
curriculum and the inappropriate teaching pedagogy of GIS training courses. 
Therefore, the EDB should develop policies for integrating GIS into high school 
geography classes and provide guidelines for teachers.  
 
GIS, in the form of a session, can be incorporated into topics. Topic 2, ‘Managing 
River and Coastal Environment: A Continuing Challenge’ stated by the EDB as an 
example, an individual session can be included in the chapter for students’ readings. 
In the GIS session, students have to analyze the landforms at the upper, middle, and 
lower courses of the river, and suggest examples of certain landforms around the 
world using GIS Story Maps by ‘whys of where’ (Kerski, 2015). For example, what 
types of terrain and features can be found on the upper course, middle course, and 
lower course of the river? How do they affect region relief? How do those landforms 
form? Why does flooding happen in those regions? All questions investigated in the 
GIS session should be related to the six themes and issues within the geographical 
curriculum (Figure 1). Steps for demonstrating the use of GIS in teaching geography 
should also be provided to teachers for reference and review. At the meantime, 
supported teaching materials should also be created by the EDB. With the leading role 
of the EDB and a clear standard set up by the EDB, teachers have a clear 
understanding of integrating GIS into teaching. 

10 
 
 
Figure 1: The Six Themes and Topics in the Hong Kong senior geography curriculum.  
The GIS session should be related to the above 6 themes and topics in the curriculum. 
 
Furthermore, the EDB might need to change its content from a skill-based approach to 
a student-centered approach. Instead of solely introducing spatial maps and educating 
teachers on GIS importance, teaching courses should provide demonstrations and 
examples of integrating GIS into geography teaching. For example, geography 
presentation and sharing can be done by Arc GIS Story Maps. This demonstration 
demonstrates understanding of the spatial distribution of industries around the world 

11 
 
in theme 3, Changing Industrial Locations - How and Why Does It Change Over Time? 
A wide variety of GIS training courses should be designed for classroom design, and 
they emphasize the application of GIS to teaching geography in practice (Tse, 2005). 
The GIS knowledge and skills developed by teachers are connected in teaching. This, 
the role of GIS in the geography curriculum is clear, which facilitates the 
implementation of GIS into geographical curriculum. 
 
5.2 Teachers: Learning New Skills with Students 
Almost all geography teachers believe that familiarizing themselves with GIS 
software takes ample time, which makes it difficult for them to incorporate GIS into 
their teaching curriculum. However, geography teachers should try their efforts to 
acquire GIS knowledge and incorporate it into their classrooms. Teachers can access 
15-minute GeoInquiries (Figure 2), which provide a wide range of human geography 
and physical geography, along with GIS digital maps (Tse, 2005). Moreover, there are 
many free GIS tutorial videos with step-by-step instructions on the Internet, namely 
The GIS Hub and GIS & RS Solution on YouTube (Figures 3&4). Following clear and 
direct instructions, teachers can acquire basic GIS skills within a couple of days and 
apply the newly learned skills to practice. Especially when teaching Regional Studies 
in the Zhujing Delta, an elective chapter in senior geography, teachers can incorporate 
GIS as educational activities. Most students find it hard to remember the Greater Bay 
Area cities. They are also confused about the economic roles of cities within the 
Greater Bay Area. The Arc GIS website I developed primarily introduces the 
economic activities development within the Greater Bay Area (Figure 5). By clicking 
into different cities in the digital maps, students can learn about the related knowledge, 
which contributes to the inclusion of GIS into classrooms, converting 
teacher-centered lessons into student-centered lessons, and increasing students’ 
engagement. Furthermore, teachers can adopt a growth model of teaching, which 
emphasizes learning in context and acquiring new skills with students (Lam et al, 
2009). After assigning GIS homework, teachers can do their own products for sharing 

12 
 
and practicing their own GIS skills. Based on the above suggestions, teachers can 
become GIS promotors at schools. 
 
Figure 2: GeoInquires provides lots of GIS instructional activities and videos for teaching. 
 
 
 
Figures 3&4: A list of free GIS tutorial videos are available in the Internet. 

13 
 
 
 
Figure 5: GIS can be used as educational activities in lessons.  
Source from self created website, https://arcg.is/1GnX9j 
 
5.3 Academia and Textbook Publishers: GIS Promoter and GIS Resource 
Provider 
Referring to scholar papers, academia and textbook publishers do not actively involve 
GIS in the curriculum. None of GIS promotional activity targeting secondary schools 
and supporting educational digital data and maps has been organized and published 
respectively since GIS inclusion into Hong Kong geography curriculum in 2000. 
Hence, textbook publishers and academia should promote GIS in the geography 
curriculum by organizing GIS information days and providing teaching materials on 
GIS. 
 
Organizing GIS information can increase students’ and teachers’ understanding of GIS. 
Referring to the past record, the first GIS day was held in 2002 by Esri China (Hong 
Kong) (Tse, 2005). The GIS day demonstrated practical application of GIS software 
and linkages with geography curriculum. However, the GIS day has shifted its focus 
to tertiary students since 2004. A similar situation can also be found in GIS 
competitions. Both events in GIS exclude secondary education. Esri China (Hong 
Kong) organizes the Esri Young Scholar Award every year for practicing GIS, but it is 

14 
 
meant primarily for tertiary students. Therefore, GIS and textbook publishers can 
collaborate to organize GIS days and GIS competitions targeting secondary education. 
For instance, Intelligence CAD/CAM Technology Ltd (ICT), a Hong Kong company 
focusing on 3D technologies, organized 3D SOLIDWORKS Design Contest for 
secondary school students and tertiary school students to promote 3D printing 
technology in Hong Kong. Academia and textbook publishers might learn from ICT 
to organize events and competitions for secondary school students.  
 
Likewise, textbook publishers and academia can develop GIS educational digital 
maps and platforms free for teachers and students. While the government’ Geoinfro 
map, the Hong Kong Geodata Store provided by the Land Department, and Esri China 
(Hong Kong) Ltd’ open Geospatial data are free, none of them are meant for 
secondary school teaching. For illustration, theme 1 in the curriculum, ‘Opportunities 
and Risks – is it rational to live in hazard prone areas?’, academia and textbook 
publishers can create map packages relating to the spatial relationships of mountains, 
island arcs, ocean trenches, volcanic activities and earthquakes. Supplementary 
worksheets can also be designed to consolidate students’ knowledge. With sufficient 
teaching materials, teachers and students will be able to integrate GIS seamlessly into 
normal teaching, which will not pose burdens in the implementation of GIS. 
 
6. Conclusion 
We live in a constantly changing world. A variety of physical changes and human 
activities change our daily lives, including volcanic eruptions, shifting plates, and 
urbanization. GIS not only beneficial to students learning geography, including 
fostering students’ geographical thinking and increasing students’ learning motivation 
in geography, but it is also the core skills of studying geography. Geography students 
should be able to apply GIS appliances to analyze spatial changes, patterns, and 
relationships geographical data. The EDB, teachers, academia, and textbook 
publishers should work hand-in-hand to fully integrate GIS into the current geography 

15 
 
curriculum. EDB should begin by providing clear instructions on including GIS into 
teaching, then update its teaching method in GIS training courses to a 
student-centered approach and provide more teaching examples. Teachers are also 
suggested to explore GIS software through online videos and use the growth model in 
their lessons. In the same way, academics and textbook publishers should provide GIS 
education platforms for secondary geography students and organize events for 
secondary students. The paper is intended to serve as a catalyst for GIS in Hong Kong 
secondary geography teaching and to stimulate new ideas. It is hoped that GIS will be 
recognized in Hong Kong education to empower students to change the world 
positively. 
 
 
 
Word Counts: 3398 
 

16 
 
References 
 
ARTVİNLİ, E. (2010). The Contribution of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to 
Geography Education and Secondary School Students’ Attitudes Related to 
GIS. Educational Sciences: Theory and Practice, 10(3), 1277-1292. 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ919854.pdf 
 
AQA. 
(2016, 
June). 
GCSE 
Geography 
(8035). 
https://www.aqa.org.uk/subjects/geography/gcse/geography-8035 
 
Chiu, R. (2017, October 22). 資訊科技教育教學法系列：在小學策略性運用資訊科
技設計教學活動以促進有關氣候變化的探究式學習. [PowerPoint slides]. 
Education 
Bureau 
HKSARG. 
https://www.edb.gov.hk/attachment/tc/edu-system/primary-secondary/applicable-
to-primary-secondary/it-in-edu/rtc/201718/EI0020170297/rtc-cc-pri-session2-tc.
pdf 
 
Demeuov, A., Tilekova1, Z., Tokpanov, Y., Hanchuk, O., Panteleeva, N., & 
Varfolomyeyeva, I. (2021). Use of GIS technology in geographical education. 
Second International Conference on Sustainable Futures: Environmental, 
Technological, 
Social 
and 
Economic 
Matters, 
280(11010), 
1-7. 
https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202128011010  
 
Education Bureau HKSARG. (2022). Geography Curriculum and Assessment Guide 
(Secondary 
4 
- 
6). 
Education 
Bureau 
HKSARG. 
https://www.edb.gov.hk/attachment/en/curriculum-development/kla/pshe/Geogra
phy%20C&A%20Guide%202022-eng.pdf 
 

17 
 
Industry Focus. (2015, August 10). Why GIS in Education Matters. Esri. 
https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/insider/why-gis-in-education-matters/ 
 
Kemp, K., & Goodchild, M., & Dodson, R. (1992). Teaching GIS in geography. The 
Professional 
Geographer, 
44(2), 
181-191. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/247701288_Teaching_GIS_in_geograp
hy 
 
Kerski, 
J. 
(2015). 
Why 
GIS 
in 
Education 
Matters?. 
Esri. 
https://www.esri.com/content/dam/esrisites/en-us/about/events/gis-day/why-gis-i
n-education-matters2-jjk.pdf 
 
Lam, C.C, Lai, E., & Wong, J. (2009). Implementation of geographic information 
system (GIS) in secondary geography curriculum in Hong Kong: current 
situations and future directions. International Research in Geographical and 
Environmental Education, 18(1). https://doi.org/10.1080/10382040802591555 
 
Stevens, D. (2021, July 9). GIS in Education. Arc GIS Story Map. 
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/c164f15367a54294ba2397fd3b758468 
 
Tse, T.T. (2005). Integrating GIS into the geography curriculum of Hong Kong 
schools. [Master’s thesis, University of Hong Kong]. The HKU Scholar Hubs. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5353/th_b3194039  
 
Walshe, N. (2018). Geographical information systems for school geography. In 
Geographical Association, Geography, 103(1), (46–49). Taylor & Francis, Ltd. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/26546764 
 
台灣教育部國民及學前教育署. (2018, October). 十二年國民基本教育課程綱要 

18 
 
國民中小學暨普通型高級中等學校. https://cutt.ly/z6Q8How 
