Inversion model validation of ground emissivity. 
Contribution to the development of SMOS algorithm 
 
F. Demontoux1, B. Le Crom1,2, G. Ruffié1, JP. Wigneron2, J. Grant2,3 D. Medina Hernandez1 
1 University Bordeaux - Laboratory IMS-UMR 5218 - 16 av.front Pey-Berland 33607 Pessac -France 
2 INRA-unit of Bioclimatologie, BP 81, Villenave d' Ornon Cedex 33883 -France 
3 Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaam 1085- Nederland. 
francois.demontoux@ims-bordeaux.fr 
 
Abstract— SMOS (Soil Moisture and Ocean Salinity), 
is the second mission of “Earth Explorer” to be developed 
within the program “Living Planet” of the European 
Space Agency (ESA). This satellite, containing the very 
first 1.4GHz interferometric radiometer 2D, will carry out 
the first cartography on a planetary scale of the moisture 
of the grounds and the salinity of the oceans.  The forests 
are relatively opaque, and the knowledge of moisture 
remains problematic. The effect of the vegetation can be 
corrected thanks a simple radiative model. Nevertheless 
simulations show that the effect of the litter on the 
emissivity of a system litter + ground is not negligible. Our 
objective is to highlight the effects of this layer on the total 
multi layer system. This will make it possible to lead to a 
simple analytical formulation of a model of litter which 
can be integrated into the calculation algorithm of SMOS. 
Radiometer 
measurements, 
coupled 
to 
dielectric 
characterizations of samples in laboratory can enable us to 
characterize the geological structure. The goal of this 
article is to present the step which we chose to validate this 
analytical model.  
 
Keywords : Permittivity, litter, soil, moisture, emissivity 
model, L-band 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
SMOS (Soil Moisture and Ocean Salinity), whose 
launching is planned for the horizon 2007, is the second 
mission of “Earth Explorer” to be developed within the 
program “Living Planet” of the European Space Agency 
(ESA) [1]. About the problems of the cycle of water, the 
data obtained by SMOS will make it possible to establish a 
chart of the moisture of continental surfaces and salinity of 
the surface layer of the oceans. The applications are 
multiple. On Earth, the retention of water in the ground 
takes a significant place in the climatic evolution because 
the moisture of the grounds represents a variable key 
controlling the exchange of water and thermal energy 
between the ground and the atmosphere. For the sea, salinity 
is a parameter which influences the circulation of the water 
masses in the oceans and involves the formation of climatic 
phenomena such as El Niño. This satellite, containing the 
very first 1.4GHz interferometric radiometer 2D, will thus 
carry out the first cartography on a planetary scale of the 
moisture of the grounds and the salinity of the oceans. There 
is a direct relation between the moisture of the ground for 
depths from 2 to 5 cm, the salinity of the oceans and the 
emissions of terrestrial origin at the frequency of 1.4 GHz. 
The forests are present in a majority of the pixels of SMOS 
in tropical, boreal and moderate zone. The forests are 
relatively opaque, and the knowledge of moisture remains 
problematic. The effect of the vegetation (tree and under 
wood) is characterized by its optical thickness τ and its 
simple diffusion albedo. Its effect can be corrected thanks a 
simple radiative model. Nevertheless simulations show that 
the effect of the litter on the emissivity of a system litter + 
ground is not negligible. It is thus necessary to set up an 
analytical model which would make it possible to correct 
the effect of this (these) additional layer (s) and to validate 
it. The objective is to highlight the effects of this layer on 
the total multi layer system. This will make it possible to 
lead to a simple analytical formulation of a model of litter 
which can be integrated into the calculation algorithm of 
SMOS in order to collect information on the moisture of the 
ground from emissivity measurements. A radiometer is 
installed on the site of the INRA institute (Bray-33) which 
allows us to take radiometric measurements on under wood 
of this site. The model of inversion will give us information 
to consider the geological structure. Measurements of the 
electromagnetic 
behaviour 
in 
situ 
can 
be 
taken 
simultaneously with preceding measurements on this ground 
using a horn antenna and a network analyzer. These 
measurements, coupled to dielectric characterizations of 
samples in laboratory can also enable us to characterize the 
geological structure. All the results obtained by these 
methods will be confronted in order to validate the 
analytical model. The goal of this article is to present this 
step which we chose to validate the analytical model.  
II. PRESENTATION OF THE MODELS  
The medium that we will study in this article is the 
forest. This system can be represented by a tri-layer system 
made up with vegetation (trees, under wood), with litter 
(vegetable remains) and ground.  
 

A. Correction of the vegetation effect  
The algorithm developed within the framework of 
mission SMOS makes possible to associate the required 
geophysical value SM (for “Soil Moisture”) to the measured 
radiometric value BT (for Brightness Temperature) thanks 
to a simplified radiative transfer model called the τ-ω model. 
This model considered the medium as a double-layered 
system made up of the vegetation (tree and under wood) and 
of the ground (ground + litter). Thanks to the simplified 
approach of the radiative transfer equation which represents 
the assessment of radiative energy [2] it is possible to obtain 
a simple expression of the emission of a cover. The 
radiometer measures a brightness temperature TB which it is 
possible to associate to the total cover emissivity thanks to 
the approximation of Rayleigh-Jeans. TB is the sum of 
outgoing energies and can then be broken up in order to 
know the emissivity of the ground (ground + litter).  
 
(
)(
)(
)
S
V
V
S
V
V
V
B
eT
T
T
γ
γ
γ
ω
+
Γ
+
−
−
=
1
1
1
        (1) 
Where : 
 e is the soil emissivity; 
TS is the soil temperature; 
ΓS is the soil reflectivity and ΓV is the vegetation 
reflectivity that will be neglected; 
ω is the vegetation single scattering albedo; 
cos(
)
e
τ
θ
γ
−
=
 is the attenuation coefficient which 
calculation is based on the optical depth of the 
vegetation layer (τ) and on the observation angle (θ). 
B. Correction of the litter effect with the reflectivity 
model τ-ω-Rr  
The principle of this model is nearly the same as the 
previous model. In this model, the reflectivity of the 
interface litter/air is not neglected any more. In this case we 
obtain a formulation in series for each of the various 
contributions to the temperature of brightness of the system. 
The extraction of the temperature of brightness of the 
ground alone is then possible starting from this formulation. 
The following expression of the global brightness 
temperature is obtained: 
 
(
)(
)(
)
(
)
[
]
S
S
L
S
S
L
L
B
T
T
T
γ
ω
γ
γ
γ
Γ
−
+
−
−
Γ
+
Γ
Γ
−
Γ
−
=
1
1
1
1
1
1
 (2) 
 
Where: 
the index L refers to the litter and the index S refers to 
the ground 
ΓS  and  ΓL are respectively the reflectivity at the 
interface ground/litter and the interface litter/air; 
 TS and TL are respectively the temperatures of the  
ground and the litter; 
)
cos(θ
τ
γ
−
= e
 is the attenuation coefficient. 
C. Dielectric measurement of soil and litter. 
Changes in the dielectric constant of the soil or the litter, 
which are mainly due to variations in water content, produce 
a variation in the soil-litter system emission. The knowledge 
of the electromagnetic properties of these two materials is 
thus fundamental when computing the system emissivity. 
We have measured the permittivity of soil and litter 
with a rectangular waveguide by taking into account the 
heterogeneity of the sample. The study was based on soil 
and litter samples collected in the coniferous forest of Les 
Landes, near Bordeaux, France. Particular attention was 
given to measurement errors and the calculation of 
permittivity [5]. 
All dielectric measurements presented in this study 
were done using a wave-guide technique in an air-
conditioned room. This method enabled us to work on 
samples wide enough to account for the layer heterogeneity. 
The samples were held inside the guide using a support (100 
µm thick Mylar sheet), considered to be quasi-transparent 
for the electromagnetic waves.  
The electromagnetic parameters of the samples were 
determined using the Nicolson, Ross and Weir method 
(NRW) [6] for rectangular waveguides. This calculation 
process 
is 
based 
on 
reflection 
and 
transmission 
measurements which are well adapted to the network 
analyzers. The principle of the calculation is based on the 
fact that introduction of the sample into the guide produces a 
change of the impedance.  
The figures 2 and 3 present results of the measurement 
for the soil. Taking into account the various errors of 
measurement and the heterogeneity of the sample we obtain 
ranges of permittivities. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
SM (vol. %)
ε'
 
Figure 1.  Range of the real part of the soil permittivity.  
 

0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
SM (vol. %)
ε''
 
Figure 2.  Range of the imaginary part of the soil permittivity. 
III. RESULTS  
The first stage was to measure with a horn antenna and 
a network analyser the in situ electromagnetic response of 
ground. A model (model HFSS-EM) simulating this 
experiment was carried out using the software HFSS (High 
Frequency Structure Simulator) [7].  
Comparing the experimental results it was possible for 
us to improve our knowledge of characteristics of the 
geological structure profile such as, for example, the 
thickness of the various layers, their permittivity and thus 
their moisture. The average thickness of litter was thus 
evaluated with 4cm and the permittivity of the components 
of the structure (the day of measurement) refers to a 
moisture of 25%. The corresponding value of emissivity is 
0.895 for the total structure (vegetation+litter+soil). 
 A radiometric measurement gives the emissivity of the 
structure. Measurements of emissivity according to moisture 
were carried out over several months (fig 3). Following 
figures  present curve of emissivity according to the soil 
moisture. Of course, during the final exploitation of the 
measurement the soil moisture will be unknown. 
To validate the  τ−ω−R model, we first applied 
the  τ−ω model on the measurements to correct the effect of 
the vegetation. Then we obtain the emissivity of the system 
litter + ground (fig 4). 
 
Figure 3.   Measurements of emissivity 
 
Figure 4.  Emissivity of the system ground+litter by the τ-ω method 
(black) and the HFSS model (grey) 
We then determined if the analytical model τ-ω-R 
allows the computation of the emissivity of the ground when 
we know the measured emissivity of the complete structure 
(litter + ground). TS, TL are known while  ΓS, ΓL, and, τ 
and the thickness of the litter are to be determined. For the 
same input data (measurements of permittivities of the 
ground and litter according to moisture carried out in 
laboratory) we compared emissivities of the ground 
resulting  from a HFSS model (HFSS-e model) and the τ-ω-
R model. A field of emissivity is defined to take into 
account the errors to the measures of permittivity introduced 
into HFSS [4]. The following figure presents the results 
obtained considering an average thickness of the litter layer 
of 4 cm with the analytical model as well as the HFSS-e 
model. On the figure 5, we observe the emissivity of the 
ground by the τ-ω-R method  in black and the emissivity of 
the ground with the HFSS model in gray according to the 
moisture of the ground. 
The initial value of the emissivity of the complete 
structure was 0.895. The model τ-ω associates a corrected 
emissivity of the system ground + litter of 0.72. The 
exploitation of the model τ-ω-R associates a corrected 
emissivity of the ground of 0,62 with a moisture of 24% 
which is a good approximation of the value awaited 
following measurements in-situ (25%).  
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
10
15
20
25
30
Msoil(%)
Emissivity
 
Figure 5.  Emissivity of the ground by the τ-ω-R method 

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
Ours first  results confirm  the relevance of the τ-ω-R 
model to correct the effect of the litter. The good agreement 
of the results resulting from various models consolidated our 
choice. The next stage of our work which we wish to present 
will consist in confirming these results by carrying out new 
series 
of 
in 
situ 
measurements 
(radiometric 
and 
electromagnetic behaviour). Thereafter we will study the 
influence of the surface roughness of the ground on 
emissivity. Accordingly, the influence of the litter coupled 
with the roughness of the ground will be approached. 
Indeed, studies showed that terms can be introduced to 
compute reflectivity of a surface to take into account its 
roughness. Corrective terms could thus be integrated into 
the τ-ω-R model to obtain the emissivity of the structure 
versus the roughness of the soil layer. Those terms will be 
determinate and validate thanks series of computation using 
the τ-ω-R model and the HFSS model. In addition to the 
roughness or the thickness of litter, we will introduce 
gradients of moisture in order to study equivalent 
emissivity.  
 
 [1] Site of the ESA:  
http://www.esa.int/esaCP/index.html. Bond: Observing 
the Earth/Esa EO Programme: The living planet/Earth 
Explorers/SMOS 
 [2] J. Grant, J.P. Wigneron, A.A. Van de Griend, S. 
Schmidl Søbjærg, NR. Skou, A. Kruskewski, J. Balling, 
First Result of the `Bray 2004' field experiment one L-band 
radiometry - microwave signal behaviour for varying 
conditions of ground moisture, article subjected “Remote 
Sensing of Environment” journal 
[3] DEMONTOUX F., RUFFIE G., WIGNERON J.P., 
ESCORIHUELA M. - J. Electromagnetic characterization of 
natural heterogeneous mediums - Application to the 
measurement of the moisture of the ground by radiometry 
microwave, JCMM 2006, Saint Etienne, 2006  
[4] B. THE CROM, F. DEMONTOUX, G. RUFFIE, 
JP. WIGNERON, J. GRANT Electromagnetic geological 
material characterization for follow-up of the moisture of 
the grounds by radiometry microwaves, JFMMA2007 
[5] F. DEMONTOUX, B. LE CROM, G. RUFFIE, JP. 
WIGNERON, J.P GRANT 
Electromagnetic characterization of soil-litter media. 
Application to the simulation of the microwave emissivity 
of the ground surface in forests (The European Physical 
Journal - Applied Physics ) (subjected) 
[6] Weir W.B, ‘Automatic measurement of complex 
dielectric 
constant 
and 
permeability 
at 
microwave 
frequencies,’ Proceedings IEEE, Vol 62, pp 33-36, Jan. 
1974. 
     [7] Ansoft website: http://www.ansoft.com. HFSS online 
help, Assigning boundaries. 
 
 
 
 
