 
1 
Heuristic Optimization of Electrical Energy Systems: Refined Metrics to 
Compare the Solutions 
Gianfranco Chicco, Andrea Mazza* 
Politecnico di Torino, Dipartimento Energia “Galileo Ferraris”, corso Duca degli Abruzzi 24, 10129 Torino, Italy  
(e-mail: gianfranco.chicco@polito.it, andrea.mazza@polito.it) 
* Corresponding author: A. Mazza (andrea.mazza@polito.it) 
 
Abstract 
Many optimization problems admit a number of local optima, among which there is the global 
optimum. For these problems, various heuristic optimization methods have been proposed. Comparing 
the results of these solvers requires the definition of suitable metrics. In the electrical energy systems 
literature, simple metrics such as best value obtained, the mean value, the median or the standard 
deviation of the solutions are still used. However, the comparisons carried out with these metrics are 
rather weak, and on these bases a somehow uncontrolled proliferation of heuristic solvers is taking 
place. This paper addresses the overall issue of understanding the reasons of this proliferation, showing 
a conceptual scheme that indicates how the assessment of the best solver may result in the unlimited 
formulation of new solvers. Moreover, this paper shows how the use of more refined metrics defined to 
compare the optimization result, associated with the definition of appropriate benchmarks, may make 
the comparisons among the solvers more robust. The proposed metrics are based on the concept of first-
order stochastic dominance and are defined for the cases in which: (i) the globally optimal solution can 
be found (for testing purposes); and (ii) the number of possible solutions is so large that practically it 
cannot be guaranteed that the global optimum has been found. Illustrative examples are provided for a 
typical problem in the electrical energy systems area – distribution network reconfiguration. The 
conceptual results obtained are generally valid to compare the results of other optimization problems. 
 
 
 

 
2 
Keywords 
Electrical energy systems, optimization, meta-heuristics, reconfiguration, solution ranking, first-order 
stochastic dominance. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
In many optimization problems, the solution space contains several local optima. The global optimum 
can be calculated either through exhaustive search over all the feasible solutions (for small-scale 
problems), or with a search over a limited number of solutions (when it can be guaranteed that the non-
searched solutions cannot provide better results). Otherwise (e.g., for metaheuristic optimization 
methods based on random number extractions), it cannot be said that the global optimum has been 
reached.  
The optimization procedure based on multiple executions of a heuristic method leads to obtain 
pseudo-optimal or best-so-far solutions in different ways: 
• by running a given method with different parameters, also aiming at performing sensitivity 
analysis to determine the best values of the parameters; 
• by running different methods (or variants of the same method), each one with a given set of 
parameters; 
• by changing the seed for random numbers extraction (even by using the same parameters). 
 
In the sequel, the term solver is generally used to indicate the execution of an optimization method or 
variant with a specific structure and set of parameters. 
For a given optimization problem, the determination of the best solver1 is one of the topics widely 
addressed in the literature. For this purpose, suitable metrics are needed in order to carry out effective 
comparisons among the methods or variants.  
The Evolutionary Computation community is addressing the comparison among different solvers in 
a wide way, by considering a predefined set of problems to be solved, and defining dedicated metrics. 
For example, the performance ratio (defined by dividing the computation time of the solver by the 
 
1 The inappropriateness of the concept “determining the best solver” is discussed in Section 3. 

 
3 
minimum computation time obtained from all the solvers) is used to build the performance profile of 
the solver [1], which is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the performance ratio. For 
optimization problems with particularly high computational burden, the data profile [2] is constructed 
by using the computation time, the number of function evaluations, and a user-defined target on the 
value of the objective function. Both approaches have as main limitations the selection of the set of 
problems to analyze, because no general criteria have been defined yet.  
Other types of comparisons consider the outcomes of two algorithms run on the same problem. 
These include non-parametric statistical hypothesis tests (e.g., the unpaired Wilcoxon rank-sum test), 
which calculate the confidence interval around the mean (or the median) of the solutions [3]. However, 
focusing on the mean or median may be limitative, as the details on the specific location of the solutions 
are not included.  
A number of scientific contributions in the electrical energy systems domain use simple indicators 
(such as best and worst solutions, mean value, standard deviation and median of the solutions). 
However, none of these metrics provides significant outcomes. In fact: 
• The best (globally optimal) solution could be obtained by chance at any time from any solver, 
regardless of the overall set of solutions reached; the best solution could be even found (without 
being aware of it) in one of the solutions indicated by the operator to form the initial population 
used by the heuristic method, namely, before running the procedure. In this case, running the 
procedure would provide the best result immediately. However, would anybody conclude that the 
heuristic is perfect, or it was just a lucky initialization? 
• The mean value of the solutions could be the same for solvers that provide very different solutions 
(some of which solutions could be close to the global optimum), or for solvers leading to many 
solutions concentrated around the mean value (in this case the best solution could be far from the 
global optimum). In this case, how to decide which solver is better? 
• Using the standard deviation in addition to the mean value seems to improve the situation, but still 
with insufficient indications on the statistical distribution of the solutions. 
 

 
4 
In order to obtain more robust statistical information on the quality of the solutions, information 
from further probabilistic moments (e.g., skewness, kurtosis, etc.) could be used. However, the 
interpretation of the contribution of these probabilistic moments to establish whether the results 
obtained from one solver are better than the results of another solver is not straightforward.  
In practice, mean and median are still used to rank the algorithms also in International competitions 
based on heuristic optimizations. For example, in the series of conferences on Evolutionary 
Computation (CEC), the criteria to rank the algorithms for constrained real parameter optimizations 
executed on one problem with a predefined number of runs are based on mean and median [4].  
Specific competitions on heuristic optimization exist also in the power and energy systems area. For 
example, the 2017 IEEE competition on modern heuristic optimizers for smart grid operation [5] 
constructed two testbeds run for a given number of scenarios. Each scenario required the execution of a 
given number NMC of Monte Carlo objective function assessments, resulting in NMC best solutions. The 
score of each scenario was then calculated as the mean value of the NMC best solutions, and the total 
score was determined by summing up the scores of each scenario. Again, the best solution and the mean 
values were used to establish the scores. 
This paper introduces a different rationale, aiming to construct performance indicators simple to be 
calculated and interpreted, and statistically more effective than the best value or the first probabilistic 
moments to represent the nature of the solutions. 
The main contributions of this paper are: 
a) An overview on some power and energy system problems addressed with heuristic methods, to 
show that several papers used different heuristic methods, variants and/or hybrid versions with the 
focus on testing a new method, without providing advances or insights on the problem itself. 
b) A wide discussion on why the use of simple metrics to compare the performance of different 
optimization algorithms may lead to an undue and somehow uncontrolled proliferation of 
heuristic solvers. A conceptual scheme is introduced to represent the unsolvable nature of the 
problem of limiting the introduction of “new best solvers”. 

 
5 
c) The formulation of more refined metrics to compare the optimization results in a statistically 
significant way for problems in which finding the global optimum cannot be guaranteed 
(extending the previous findings of the authors presented in [6]) and, as a new addition to the 
same framework, for problems with computable global optimum. 
In particular, more refined metrics are defined to compare the optimization results in two specific 
cases: 
• Case G (Global) – The globally optimal solution can be calculated in an acceptable computation 
time. Conceptually, there would be no need for running a new solver on a problem with known 
global optimum. However, testing a solver on test systems with known globally optimal solution 
may also be useful for a preliminary assessment of that solver before applying it to large-scale 
problems. This is for example the case of using predefined benchmark functions to test the solvers 
[4][7]. However, the classical benchmark functions are rather different with respect to the 
function used for applications on electrical systems. In fact, the electrical network introduces 
challenging aspects, such as discrete problem formulations and especially constraints difficult to 
be handled (e.g., the equality constraints given by active and reactive power flow balances, and 
the radiality of the network structures [8][9]). 
• Case R (Relative) – The number of feasible solutions is so large that the global optimum cannot 
be found in a reasonable computation time. In this case, the pseudo-optimal solution can be 
identified only in a relative way as the best solution found so far. This situation occurs frequently 
in many problems due to of the combinatorial explosion of the number of possible solutions for 
large-scale systems. 
 
The metrics introduced in this paper are based on the calculation of a number of solutions from 
different solvers, on the construction of the CDF of these solutions, and on the definition of specific 
indicators with intuitive geometric meaning. These indicators are based on the CDF of the solutions 
obtained from each solver and on a reference CDF constructed by considering the global optimum for 
Case G or a selected set of solutions for Case R. 

 
6 
The next sections of this paper are organized as follows. Section 2 recalls some typical power and 
energy system problems addressed by using heuristic methods. Section 3 discusses the issue of finding 
out the best solver, casting the problem into a perpetual motion conceptual scheme. Section 4 illustrates 
the use of refined performance metrics based on first-order stochastic dominance concepts. Section 5 
introduces the specific problem (optimal distribution system reconfiguration) addressed in the 
illustrative examples. Section 6 shows the results of specific case study applications. The last section 
contains the concluding remarks. 
 
2. Typical power and energy problems solved with heuristic methods  
Various optimization problems in the power and energy systems area have been solved by using 
heuristic methods, in particular with:  
• 
objective functions defined in highly non-linear forms, with several local optima; 
• linear or non-linear constraints that make the domain of definition of the variables 
mathematically non-convex; 
• problems with no possibility to compute derivatives that could be sent to algorithms that use this 
type of information; 
• discrete combinatorial problems, affected by the curse of dimensionality when applied to large-
scale systems. 
Some favorable aspects of using heuristic methods are that: 
• the heuristics are generally simple to implement, even though in some cases careful 
implementation is needed to guarantee the effective incorporation of equality and inequality 
constraints (e.g., the radiality of the distribution network) [8]; 
• the heuristics contain in their underlying principles some specialized operators (e.g., parallelism, 
elitism, selection with probability-based acceptance, topology, memory, immunity, and self-
adaptation [10]) that could enable wider exploration of the space of the solutions;  
• the heuristics can be hybridized to benefit from the different characteristics of two or more 
methods, for example adding an effective local search strategy to a method based on exploring a 

 
7 
wide range of solutions, or using an internal optimization to find the most suitable parameters 
for the solver. A successful example is the Evolutionary Particle Swarm Optimization (EPSO) 
[11], which uses an evolutionary model together with a particle movement operator to formulate 
a self-adaptive algorithm. 
Various applications of heuristic methods to electrical power and energy systems have been 
reviewed in [12]. A selected set of illustrative applications is considered in this paper to show the 
diffusion of heuristic methods applied to these problems, also in recent years: 
• Distribution system reconfiguration (DSR): selection of the open/closed condition of the distribution 
network branches (or of the switches at the branch terminals) to optimize a predefined objective (or 
multi-objective) function. DSR is a combinatorial optimization problem that uses non-linear 
mathematical models. Specific constraints are the network connectivity, the need of considering only 
radial configurations, and the technical limits on the node voltages, branch currents, and others [10]. 
More details are indicated in Section 5.2, as the DSR problem is used in this paper to show the 
application examples. 
• Economic dispatch (ED): calculation of the electrical power outputs of the generation units in the 
power system to obtain the minimum total operating cost, subject to a set of constraints. The equality 
constraints are the power balance equations. The inequality constraints (depending on the type of 
generation units) can include minimum and maximum power, prohibited operating zones, multiple 
fuel options, transmission limits, the valve-point effect, ramp rates, discharge limits, reservoir 
volume limits, and water dynamic balance equation with transport delay time [13].  
• Load forecasting (LF): forecast of the demand at different time scales (short-term, medium-term, and 
long-term) and levels of aggregation (individual or aggregate loads). The demand depends on 
exogenous factors (e.g., temperature, humidity, economic and social aspects) in a complex and non-
linear way, and other random components appear as “noise”.  
• Maintenance scheduling (MS): definition of the sequence in time to perform maintenance of the 
generation units to optimize a given objective function under the system operational constraints. This 
problem is non-linear and stochastic, and may have a number of conflicting objectives. MS is closely 

 
8 
linked to reliability and costs, which can be handled within a risk analysis framework. The 
constraints are technical (e.g., load demand, system reserve requirements, availability of equipment, 
and duration of the maintenance period), personnel-related (e.g., availability of maintenance teams), 
and economic (budget constraints).  
• Optimal power flow (OPF): determination of the operating point at steady state to minimize a 
predefined objective (or multi-objective) function (e.g., considering costs, emissions, system losses, 
and reactive power support) under a wide set of network constraints.  
• Power system planning (PSP): the related problems include operational planning (i.e., changes 
occurring in the system at constant load, such as enhanced system automation, replacement of 
network components, or reactive power planning) and expansion planning of network and generation 
(considering scenarios of demand growth, also with the evolution of distributed generation and 
storage). The objective function for planning is typically economic and contains discounted 
investment costs, operation and maintenance costs, reliability costs, and salvage value. The 
constraints are numerous and involve technical, economic, environmental and social aspects. 
Planning problems are by nature large-scale, non-linear combinatorial problems, with integer and 
real variables. The number of solutions could grow exponentially with the system size, and there is 
typically a large number of local optima.  
Among the contents presented in [12] in 2008, the heuristic methods surveyed in [14] include 
evolutionary algorithms (e.g., genetic algorithms, evolution strategies, evolutionary programming, and 
genetic programming), simulated annealing, tabu search (which is not a probability-based method), and 
particle swarm optimization. However, many other heuristic techniques have been introduced in the last 
decade. A text search has been carried out in the Science Direct database, considering the set of 
problems indicated above and different heuristics. Table 1 shows the number of articles in which each 
heuristic has been mentioned or applied (in its original version or in a variant), or has been used as a 
benchmark to compare the results obtained by another solver. The cases in which the heuristic appears 
for at least ten times for a given problem are listed in the table. Other heuristics appearing less than ten 
times are not considered. A basic reference is included for each heuristic.  

 
9 
From Table 1 it appears clearly that some classical heuristics are widely considered, but also many 
heuristics appeared recently have been applied. Overall, hundreds of articles are available in the 
literature to solve the set of problems indicated. For this reason, a comprehensive review of the contents 
of these contributions is outside the scope of this paper. However, most of these articles do not provide 
any advance or insight on the specific problem, but merely aim at testing a “new” heuristic, or a variant 
of an existing heuristic, or a hybridization of different methods (e.g., different heuristics, or heuristics 
and conventional algorithms, in the latter case typically calling the conventional algorithms to perform a 
deterministic local search). In the most significant cases, some parts of the methods are customized to 
deal with specific aspects of the problem analyzed (e.g., handling the radial network constraint in DSR). 
This customization can be seen as a methodological insight. Nevertheless, there is no certainty that the 
changes introduced lead systematically to better results with respect to other variants proposed. This 
lack of certainty gives room to the proliferation of new methods, variants and hybridizations. 
Another reason why the number of contributions on testing heuristics in the power and energy 
systems area is so high is the lack of widely accepted benchmarks defined for specific problems. This 
situation is different with respect to the evolutionary computation community area, where given 
benchmark functions are used to test the algorithms. However, these benchmark functions typically 
have different properties with respect to the objective functions and constraints encountered in power 
and energy system problems. In particular, the major challenges appearing in the power and energy 
systems area include the need for handling the non-linear equality constraints that describe the power 
balances in large-scale applications, the topological constraints of the electrical networks, and the non-
connected domain of definition of the decision variables. 
On the basis of the above considerations, the next section presents a consistent scheme to explain the 
main reasons why there are so many heuristics proposed to solve the optimization problems, claiming 
each time that the solver tested is better than the existing ones. 
 
3. Best Solver or Best Solution? A Perpetual Motion Conceptual Scheme  
Let us consider an optimization problem that admits several local optima, among which the global 

 
10 
optimum cannot be identified in a reasonable computation time. This problem is suitable for testing new 
solvers. Let us start from the best solution found so far, and construct a framework to represent the 
activity carried out by testing different solvers.  
Fig. 1 shows how the identification of the best solver can be cast into a perpetual motion conceptual 
scheme, with no exit point. The solutions (i.e., objective function values) are determined in the testing 
block. On the basis of this scheme, the number of scientific publications that appear on the same subject 
by changing the solver is continuously increasing. Once a new “best” solver has been identified, the 
process continues by testing new solvers. Due to the intractable number of possible solutions, and to the 
uncertainty given by the random search embedded in the solvers, it is possible to find out another solver 
providing better results according with the metric established for comparison. Of course, if the metric is 
weak, better solutions may be found more easily, as remarked below.  
An interesting question may be: is this growth in the number of publications continuously claiming 
to have found the best solver conceptually sound? The notes provided in this section aim at showing 
that in various cases the reasons to declare a “new” solver as the best one are somehow questionable.   
The key issue is that, in the testing of a given problem with different solvers that provide stochastic 
outcomes, the relation between the solvers is non-transitive. For example, given three solvers denoted 
as A, B and C, the fact that solver A is better than solver B in a test, and that solver B is better than 
solver C in another test, does not imply that solver A is better than solver C in a further test. Thereby, 
even though a new solver has been tested on a given problem against other solvers, it cannot be 
concluded that the new solver is generally better than the other solvers. The main problem is that this 
approach is only driven by the goal of obtaining better results, without trying to understand why a solver 
performs better than others. This approach is making the meta-heuristics field vulnerable, as the undue 
and somehow uncontrolled proliferation of meta-heuristic solvers makes it difficult to recognize the true 
innovation occurring in the field [50]. 
In the framework indicated in Fig. 1 for Case R optimization problems with no known global 
optimum applied to large-scale systems, the crucial point is: if the solutions found on a specific problem 
by using one solver are better than with another solver, this does not mean that the solver is better. In 

 
11 
other terms, “the solver is better” is a global property that cannot be demonstrated in a complete way. 
Thereby, any contribution that claims to have found the “best method” by comparing solutions obtained 
from different methods should at least restate the conclusions to indicate that the method tested has 
provided better solutions than other methods for the specific problem and case study application (with 
the specific initialization and in terms of the indicator used to assess the solutions). Of course, in this 
case the strength of the scientific contribution would sound poorer, almost vanishing. 
Nevertheless, in the absence of a global optimum there is no way to break the perpetual motion 
conceptual scheme in a scientifically rigorous way. What can be done is to improve the mechanism of 
comparison among different solvers, requiring more significant information to declare that the solutions 
obtained from a solver are better than the solutions given by other solvers. In this case, the core of the 
problem is to reinforce the meaning of the test block “better solution?” appearing in Fig. 1. This can be 
done by resorting to refined metrics for ranking the solvers, based on a statistically significant set of 
solutions. 
A dedicated metric has been introduced in [51], using two criteria to evaluate an algorithm, namely, 
the number of objective function calculations occurred before satisfying the stop criterion, and the value 
of the best objective function found by the optimization algorithm. These criteria are used in a Pareto-
dominance analysis, concluding that the best algorithms are the ones that produce non-dominated 
solutions in the plane defined by the number of objective function calculations and by the objective 
function value itself. An approximation to the first-order stochastic dominance concept [52] has been 
used in [51] to rank the solvers in each evaluation criterion. Further studies in [53] considered also one-
way ANOVA for ranking each evaluation criterion.  
In the following section, the stochastic dominance concepts are exploited to formulate meaningful 
indicators for creating stronger comparisons among the optimization solutions. These indicators are 
then tested on the DSR problem, whose characteristics are more elaborated than the classical 
benchmark functions. 
 
 

 
12 
4. Refined Metrics and Indicators to Characterize the Results of Optimization Methods 
4.1. Optimization formulation and deterministic dominance  
The general framework for optimization considers the minimization case (without loss of generality) 
for a system with given vectors p of parameters and d of decision variables, and a scalar objective 
function y. In mathematical terms: 
𝑦= min{𝑔(𝒑, 𝒅)}  
(1) 
s.t. 𝒓(𝒑, 𝒅) = 0 
           𝒘(𝒑, 𝒅) ≤0 
where 𝑔(. ), 𝒓(. ) and 𝒘(. ) indicate the function representing the objective, the vector of equality 
constraints, and the vector of inequality constraints, respectively. 
The solvers are taken from a given set S. Each solver is executed Hs times. The dependence on s 
appears because the number of solutions may be different from solver to solver (for example,  
considering the execution times of each solver, Hs can be determined as the number of solutions 
provided by the solver s within a predefined total execution time).   
The metrics considered here are based on the concept of dominance between two sets of solutions. 
Let us take the HA and HB solutions respectively provided by two solvers {A, B} Î S run on the same 
optimization problem. If the solutions obtained from the two solvers are not overlapped, deterministic 
dominance does exist. Let 𝑦3
4 be the hth solution obtained with solver A, and 𝑦5
4 the hth solution 
obtained with solver B. The solutions obtained from solver A exhibit deterministic dominance over the 
solutions obtained from solver B if (Fig. 2): 
max489,…,;<𝑦3
4= < min489,…,;<𝑦5
4= 
(2) 
However, in practical applications, deterministic dominance rarely occurs. Further concepts of 
stochastic dominance are illustrated in the next section.  
 
4.2. Stochastic dominance  

 
13 
The stochastic dominance concepts introduced in [52] are revisited and applied to the solutions of an 
optimization problem with different solvers, extending the approach recently introduced by the authors 
in [6].  
Let us consider the same number H of solutions for each solver to be compared. Let us construct the 
CDF 𝐹@
(;)(𝑦) of the H solutions of the optimization (1) obtained from each solver s Î S, sorted in the 
ascending order of the variable y. Fig. 3 shows an example of construction of the CDF for an example 
with H = 50 solutions and objective function expressed in per units (p.u.). 
Different stochastic dominance formulations can be introduced by considering the solvers {A, B} Î 
S, run H times each on the same minimization problem: 
1. First-order stochastic dominance: the solutions obtained from solver A exhibit first-order stochastic 
dominance over the solutions obtained from solver B if and only if the following condition is 
satisfied on the CDFs for any value of the variable y, with strict inequality existing for at least one 
value of y: 
𝐹3
(;)(𝑦) ≥𝐹5
(;)(𝑦)  
(3) 
In graphical terms (Fig. 4a), the condition (3) means that no entry of the CDF referring to the 
solutions of solver B has to lie on the left-hand side of the CDF referring to the solutions of solver A. 
The strict inequality is required to exclude that all the entries in the two CDFs are identical. 
2. Second-order stochastic dominance: the solutions obtained from solver A exhibit second-order 
stochastic dominance over the solutions obtained from solver B if and only if the following condition 
is verified on the CDFs for any value of the variable y, with strict inequality existing for at least one 
value of y: 
∫
D𝐹E
(;)(𝑧) −𝐹H
(;)(𝑧)I
J
K8L
≥0 
(4) 
In graphical terms (Fig. 4b and Fig. 4c), the second-order stochastic dominance condition is based on 
an integral quantity. Thus, it cannot be excluded that one or more entries of the CDF referring to the 
solutions of solver B are located on the left-hand side of the CDF referring to the solutions of solver 
A (as in Fig. 4b). The case of Fig. 4b satisfies the second-order stochastic dominance conditions (as 

 
14 
the area in Fig. 4c is always positive). However, it does not satisfy the first order stochastic 
dominance, because there are intersections between the CDFs.  
 
By definition, the first-order stochastic dominance condition is sufficient to ensure second-order 
stochastic dominance. However, the reverse case does not hold, as shown before. For the same reason, 
higher-order stochastic dominance is not considered. The first-order stochastic dominance is then taken 
as the relevant metric for constructing the indicators shown in the next sections. 
 
4.3. Determination of the reference CDF  
The proposed performance indicators require the definition of a reference CDF 𝐹MNO
(;)(𝑦) constructed 
by considering H solutions for the variable y. The entries of 𝐹MNO
(;)(𝑦) must satisfy the following 
property, with respect to the entries of every CDF 𝐹@
(;)(𝑦) corresponding to the solvers s Î S used in 
the comparison: 
𝐹MNO
(;)(𝑦) ≥𝐹@
(;)(𝑦)  
(5) 
Practically, no entry of the CDFs originated from the solutions of the solvers under comparison has 
to be located on the left-hand side of the reference CDF. However, partial or even total superposition of 
the CDFs under test with the reference CDF is allowed. Thereby, the reference CDF exhibits first-order 
stochastic dominance with respect to all the CDFs under test, with the additional possibility that the 
reference CDF is exactly equal with one of the CDFs (not included in the first-order stochastic 
dominance conditions). 
The reference CDF is constructed in a different way in the following two cases: 
• Case G: the reference CDF 𝐹MNO,P is equal to zero until the global optimum is reached, then it jumps 
to unity (Fig. 5).  
• Case R: the procedure introduced in [6] is used. The reference CDF 𝐹MNO,Q
(;)  is constructed by 
calculating the objective function for Hs solutions from each solver, by using the penalized objective 
function to take into account possible constraint violations, as indicated in Section 5.2. Then, the 

 
15 
number of solutions is taken as 𝐻= min@ {𝐻@}, and the best H solutions are considered for each 
solver, with a benefit for solvers that provide faster executions. To compare the solutions obtained 
from M solvers, the number of solution points available is M×H, from which the best H points (taken 
in the ascending order) are used to construct the reference CDF. Fig. 6 summarizes the procedure by 
using three solvers {A, B, C}Î S and H = 100 points for each solver. 
There is a conceptual difference between the rationale used to define the reference CDF for Case G 
and Case R. In Case G a fixed entry (the global optimum) is available, thereby the reference CDF is 
fixed and the comparison between the actual CDF and the reference CDF is conducted in absolute 
terms. In Case R the entries of the reference CDF may vary depending on H and on the context in which 
the calculations are carried out (e.g., the computation time limit indicated above), so that the 
comparison between the actual CDF and the reference CDF is conducted in relative terms.  
 
4.4. Definition of the performance indicators  
For the calculation of the performance indicators, the reference CDF and the test CDF must be 
represented with the same number of points H on the vertical axis, corresponding to the width Dc =1/H 
of each step on the vertical axis. Thereby, in Case G the reference CDF is conceptually discretized into 
H points having the same value (the global optimum), located at successive vertical steps of width Dc.  
The rationale to construct the performance indicators by using stochastic dominance concepts is that 
these indicators provide a global statistically-based information on the set of solutions considered. This 
kind of information describes the performance of each solver better than any individual statistical 
indicator (e.g., mean, median, standard deviation, …). Moreover, in the proposed approach the 
performance indicator is quantified by using a single number variable from 0 to 1, with higher values 
representing better performance, avoiding the need of merging the information from multiple statistical 
indicators to characterize the results.  
At first, the area between the reference CDF and the test CDF is calculated. The H objective 
function values located on the horizontal axis of the CDF, z = 1,…, H, are denoted with 𝑦@;(𝑧) for the 

 
16 
test CDF of solver s Î S, and with 𝑦MNO,Q
;
(𝑧) for the reference CDF in Case R. In Case G, there is a 
single value 𝑦P. The following areas are calculated by summing up the horizontal areas defined from 
the reference and test CDFs (since the vertical steps in the CDF have the same width, Fig. 7): 
• In Case G: 
𝐴@,P
(;) =
9
; ∫
D𝑦@
(;)(𝑧) −𝑦PI
;
K8L
 
(6) 
• In Case R: 
𝐴@,Q
(;) =
9
; ∫
D𝑦@
(;)(𝑧) −𝑦MNO,Q
(;) (𝑧)I
;
K8L
 
(7) 
The performance indicators are then defined under the general name OPISD (Optimization 
Performance Indicator based on Stochastic Dominance). For the two cases described in Section 4.3, the 
indicators are formulated as:  
• OPISDG (global OPISD), applied in Case G by considering H CDF values: 
𝑂𝑃𝐼𝑆𝐷P
(;) =
9
9YEZ,[
(\) 
(8) 
• OPISDR (relative OPISD), applied in Case R by considering H CDF values: 
𝑂𝑃𝐼𝑆𝐷Q
(;) =
9
9YEZ,]
(\) 
(9) 
 
The OPISD definition encompasses cases with null area (the CDF of the test solver is exactly equal 
to the reference CDF, with OPISD = 1), or when the objective function assumes both positive and 
negative values, providing results in the interval (0,1) at all times.  
In spite of their similar definition, the two indicators have a fundamental conceptual difference: the 
reference CDF for global OPISD is based on the global optimum, which never changes and is an 
absolute reference to rank the results of solvers executed in different situations. Conversely, the 
reference CDF for relative OPISD generally changes each time a comparison among two or more 
solvers is carried out, so that the numerical results for OPISDR are only valid for the corresponding 
ranking obtained, and cannot be used in successive comparisons.   
 The test methods compared are then ranked on the basis of the relevant OPISD indicator, from the 

 
17 
most effective one (with the highest OPISD value) to the less effective one (with the lowest OPISD 
value). 
The new OPISD indicators are a general-purpose way to rank the performance of heuristic methods, 
for which many solutions may be available from multiple executions (even with the same parameters, 
by just changing the seed for random number extractions). Applications of the proposed metric to the 
discrete optimization problem DSR are illustrated in Section 6. 
 
4.5. Further indicators  
In addition to simple indicators such as the mean, the median and other probabilistic moments, further 
indicators can be defined by taking into account how many solutions are located on the reference CDF. 
In this case, the different nature of Case G and Case R emerges again. In fact: 
• The indicator 𝑃𝐸𝑅𝐶P
(;) represents the percentage of solutions that reach the global optimum in Case 
G. This indicator has an absolute meaning, as the global optimum for the problem under analysis is 
fixed. 
• The indicator 𝑃𝐸𝑅𝐶Q
(;) represents the percentage of solutions located on the reference CDF in Case 
R. This indicator has relative meaning, as the reference CDF in this case changes depending on the 
test CDFs in the comparison carried out.   
 
5. Optimization Problem and Solution Methods 
5.1. Stochastic dominance applications to power and energy systems 
The most typical application of stochastic dominance concepts in the power and energy systems area 
refers to risk-aversion modelling in electricity trading and portfolio optimization. The second-order 
stochastic dominance constraint has been imposed in [54] to reduce the risk of low profit for an 
electricity retailer, and in [55] for self-scheduling large consumers. In [56] portfolio optimization has 
been carried out by setting up a minimum tolerable CDF used as the reference; then, the CDF of the 
portfolio model is accepted if it exhibits second-order stochastic dominance over the reference CDF. 

 
18 
Furthermore, first-order stochastic dominance constraints have been applied to optimize the 
introduction of new generation capacity [57], and in risk-based energy trading in a virtual power plant 
[58]. Energy scheduling in a residential system with renewable energy sources has been addressed in 
[59] by using first-order stochastic dominance to choose the renewable energy distributions. The first-
order stochastic dominance used in [6] adopted a performance indicator corresponding to OPISDR. 
Without loss of generality, the results are presented on a classical optimization problem in the 
electricity distribution area – DSR with minimum losses. This discrete optimization problem is 
conceptually simple and can be easily understood by the readers with different backgrounds. At the 
same time, for small-scale systems is possible to calculate the global optimum and construct the 
reference CDF for Case G. Conversely, for large-scale systems the combinatorial explosion of the 
number of solutions prevents determining the global optimum in a reasonable computation time, so that 
the definitions valid for Case R have to be applied.  
 
5.2. Description of the DSR optimization problem 
The Medium Voltage (MV) electricity distribution systems are structurally composed of a number of 
nodes interconnected by branches forming a weakly meshed structure. The network is typically 
operated with radial configuration in order to simplify the protection schemes.  
For a distribution system with N nodes, B total branches and S supply points, any radial 
configuration starting from the supply nodes without isolating any other node has L = B-N+S open 
branches. This condition is necessary to define the radial network, but it is not sufficient, because 
cutting L branches at random would very likely create loops in the network and isolate some nodes. 
Moreover, the total number Y of radial configurations that can be obtained by starting from a given 
network structure is computable from the Kirchhoff’s tree matrix theorem [60]. However, the number Y 
could be so high to make the generation of the configurations (with a graph-search algorithm) 
practically intractable. For example, the real distribution network shown in [61] has N = 207 nodes, B = 
213 branches and S = 1 supply point, resulting in L = 7 open branches for each radial network, and in Y 
= 151,641,612 possible radial configurations. For larger networks the situation is even more extreme. 

 
19 
For example, in the urban distribution network used in [62] with N = 535 nodes, B = 554 branches and S 
= 4 supply points, there are L = 23 open branches for each radial network, and the number of possible 
radial configurations is as high as Y = 7.197·1032. With these numbers, it is clearly not feasible to 
determine the global optimum for this problem in a reasonable computation time. Thus, a number of 
deterministic and meta-heuristic methods have been proposed in the literature to calculate pseudo-
optimal solutions with an acceptable computational burden. Reviewing the state of the art of these 
methods is outside the scope of this paper (some recent reviews may be found in [63] and in the 
introductory sections of [61]).  
A further challenge of this problem is that the solutions have to satisfy two types of constraints: 
1. All configurations created in the solution process have to be radial. This aspect is addressed by 
applying the close-open branch-exchange mechanism [64], in which each configuration change is 
applied by closing an open branch, detecting the closed loop formed in the network, then opening a 
branch in the loop to restore the radial structure.  
2. Operational limits, referring to various aspects, such as maximum and minimum voltage magnitude 
limits at each node, maximum fault currents at each node, maximum current magnitude in each 
branch, and so forth [65]. This aspect is addressed by using a penalized objective function to ensure 
that any radial configuration corresponds to a numerical solution, discarding only the configurations 
leading to lack of convergence of the power flow calculations. In meta-heuristic solvers, a temporary 
solution worsening may be acceptable (if a probability-based check is passed) in order to open the 
search space to reach more solutions.  
 
For a given radial configuration X, belonging to the set X of the radial configurations for which the 
power flow calculations is solvable, the total network losses 𝑃aba(𝑋) are expressed in terms of the 
resistance Rb and current magnitude Ib of any branch b Î 𝑩, where 𝑩 is the set of network branches: 
𝑃aba(𝑋) = ∑
𝑅f𝐼f
g
f∈𝑩
 
(10) 

 
20 
Considering the set 𝑽 of variables subject to constraint violation, the amount of violation ∆𝑣l and the 
penalty factor (𝜌l > 0 only if the corresponding violation exists) for 𝑖∈𝑽, the penalized objective 
function is: 
𝑓p(𝑋) = 𝑃aba(𝑋)[1 + ∑
𝜌l(∆𝑣l)𝟐
l∈𝑽
] 
(11) 
The optimization problem becomes 
minv∈𝑿<𝑓p(𝑋)= 
(12) 
Without loss of generality, the minimum losses problem addressed here is based on a single loading 
condition. More generally, with the diffusion of distributed resources in the distribution systems, the 
problem is formulated by considering the evolution in time of generation and demand patterns, 
assessing the losses on a given time interval, also with the possibility of determining an optimal set of 
network configurations for intra-day time periods [61]. The concepts introduced in this paper can be 
directly applied to the results of these more detailed problem formulations.   
 
5.3. Solution methods 
This paper considers the three meta-heuristic solvers Simulated Annealing (SA), Genetic Algorithms 
(GA), and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). These solvers have been widely used in the literature 
for the DSR problem [63]. For each solver, there is a set of parameters to be defined. In addition, these 
methods require random choices; repeatability of the results is ensured by fixing the seed for random 
number extraction to a given value s0. The seed s0 is the entry point to access the sequence of random 
numbers implemented in the specific function to extract random numbers from a uniform probability 
distribution in (0,1), and cannot be considered as a parameter of the solver. 
The same adaptive stop criterion is used for the three methods, concluding the execution when the 
best solution does not change (or changes less than a predefined threshold) for a predefined number Ns 
of successive iterations [65]. The other parameters are recalled below. 
The SA method [41] is composed of a main cycle and an internal cycle. The main cycle does not 
require specific knowledge on the problem. It is driven by a control parameter c, whose initial value c0 

 
21 
decays in the successive iterations (using m as the iteration counter) with the progression cm = a cm-1, 
with constant cooling rate a chosen in the range (0,1), until the adaptive stop criterion is satisfied. The 
initial value c0 can be estimated by running the SA procedure with given values of the parameters until 
a predefined number of worse solutions Nw has been reached, then calculating the average worsening 
∆𝑓
xxxxp and imposing a percentage of acceptance p0 for that worsening. Thereby, c0 = ∆𝑓
xxxxp/ln(1/p0). At any 
iteration of the main cycle, an internal cycle is run. The internal cycle addresses the characteristics of 
the specific problem. Its implementation is simple: starting from the best configuration found so far, 
successive branch-exchanges are performed to maintain the network radial. In each branch exchange, 
the branches to close and open are chosen at random, and the resulting configuration is accepted if there 
is an improvement over the best solution found so far, or if the worsening is acceptable based on a 
probabilistic check. The internal cycle stops when the maximum number MA of configurations analyzed 
or the maximum number MC of configurations accepted are reached [65].  
In the GA method [66], the information on the network configuration is coded in a string (called 
chromosome) containing B binary values (called genes, set to 0 when the branch is open and to 1 when 
the branch is closed). A population of CGA strings is formed, the objective function is calculated for 
each string and its corresponding fitness is obtained by dividing the objective function values by the 
sum of the objective functions. In the iterative solution process, at each iteration the genetic operators 
selection (based on the fitness of each string, with a user-defined criterion), crossover (with crossover 
probability pc) and mutation (with mutation probability pm) are successively applied until the adaptive 
stop criterion is satisfied. While the selection operator is independent of the specific problem, the 
implementations of both crossover and mutation are critical, because the radial network configuration 
could be lost. As such, these operators have to be redefined to guarantee the generation of radial 
configurations. A trivial but time consuming solution would be to check if the network is radial after 
each application of crossover and mutation, rejecting the application of the operator for non-radial 
configurations. Effective solutions to guarantee that the configurations are radial have been proposed in 
[67] by implementing crossover only through a local improvement strategy (without using mutation), in 
[68] by using a node encoding based on Prufer numbers, and in [69] by implementing crossover and 

 
22 
mutation by using the matroid theory. Further improvements for the mutation operator have been 
introduced in [70]. 
In the PSO method [40], the information is coded as in the GA. A population of CPSO particles is 
used. In the iterative solution process, the three terms forming the velocity of the particles (inertia, 
memory, and cooperation) are updated and the particle positions are determined for each particle. The 
objective function is calculated for each string, updating the local best and the global best each time the 
corresponding solution is improved. The inertia weight w is progressively changed during the iterations 
from a maximum (initial) value winit to a minimum (final) value wfinal [71]. A list of possible strategies 
for varying the inertia weight w is shown in [72]. In this paper, the strategy e1-PSO from [73] has been 
applied. In the PSO implementation, the knowledge on the specific problem is used to drive the creation 
of new radial configurations by using the information on the local best and the global best, as in [74]. 
The changes in the memory (or cooperation) term are applied only to a subset of branches chosen 
according to specific logical operations between the current configuration and the local (or global) best. 
In summary, the sets of parameters considered are: 
• for SA: 𝑷z3 = { a, Nw, p0, MA, MC, Ns}; 
• for GA: 𝑷P3 = {CGA, pc, pm, Ns}; 
• for PSO: 𝑷{z| = {CPSO, winit, wfinal, Ns}. 
 
6. Application Examples  
6.1. Test network with known global optimum (Case G) 
Let us consider a test network used in various literature contributions, with 70 nodes [75]. The 
characteristics of this network are summarized in Table 2. The total number of radial configurations is 
Y = 407,924 [61]. 
The initial network structure and loads are taken from [76], expressed in the reference system2 using 
the rated voltage as the base voltage, and 10 kVA as the base power. The supply voltage is set to 1 p.u.  
 
2 This reference is adopted here in the absence of uniform definitions of base power and base voltages in the literature papers 
using this test network. 

 
23 
In the global optimum with these loading conditions the minimum total losses are 9.859 p.u. 
 
6.1.1. Comparison among the solutions obtained from different solvers 
For the execution of the solvers, Hs = 100 solutions are extracted from each solver, and H = 100 
solutions are used to form the reference CDF. Furthermore, Ns = 20 is used in the stop criterion, and the 
seed for random number extraction is fixed (s0 = 1) for all executions. The parameters of the three 
solvers are set up to leave only one or a few parameters variable in a given range of values (Table 3). 
The other parameters are defined with the following general choices: 
• SA: the method illustrated in [65] is executed with Nw = 10, p0 = 0.5, and constant values MA = 200 
and MC = 50. The variable values of the cooling rate a are changed with regular steps.  
• GA: the operators described in [67] and [70] are used for crossover and mutation, respectively. The 
mutation probability (applied to each gene) is set to pm = 0.001. The variable parameters are the 
number of chromosomes CGA and the crossover probability pc, each one with 10 values chosen at 
regular steps. The solver is run with all the combinations of the two parameters. 
• PSO: the method described in [74] has been used. The variable parameters are the number of 
particles CPSO and the initial value of the inertia weight winit (with the final value of the inertia weight 
fixed to wfinal = 0.4 [71] and the variation strategy taken from [73]), each of which with 10 values 
chosen at regular steps. The solver is run with all the combinations of the two parameters.  
The set of values used in this example aim to generate various solutions and calculate the indicator 
𝑂𝑃𝐼𝑆𝐷P
(;), without any  attempt to find the optimal set of parameters for each method. 
Fig. 8 shows the reference CDF and the test CDFs of the results obtained from the methods to be 
compared. Table 4 reports the performance indicators. The solutions provided by SA and PSO cover 
100% of the reference CDF, reaching the global optimum. These methods are then viable to be tested 
on large-scale cases. The example shown for the GA solutions suggests that the setting used for GA is 
inappropriate to be used, so this GA is not suggested to be used any further. 
 
6.2. Large real network with unknown global optimum (Case R) 

 
24 
The 207-node real distribution network mentioned in Section 4.2 is used for the calculations. The 
characteristics of this network are summarized in Table 5. The base power is 1 MVA, and the base 
voltage is equal to the rated voltage of the network (10.5 kV). The global optimum is unknown. The 
methods SA, GA and PSO have been tested with the same parameters indicated in Table 3. The number 
of solutions extracted for each solver is Hs = H =100.  
 
6.2.1. Comparison among the solutions obtained from different solvers 
Fig. 9 shows the reference CDF and test CDFs of the results obtained from the three methods. Table 
6 reports the performance indicators. In the loading conditions considered, the SA solutions are the best 
ones in the OPISD ranking, followed by PSO and GA. Fig. 9 shows that the SA results are not 
uniformly located at the left-hand side of the CDFs referring to PSO and GA. The SA solution with the 
highest objective function is worse than the PSO solution with the highest objective function.  
In the case studied, the PERC ranking provides the same results, i.e., the performance of SA and 
PSO are significantly better than the performance of GA. However, Table 6 indicates that the PSO 
results are closer to the ones of GA rather than SA, because the comparison is just based on the number 
(and percentage) of occurrences of the best solution, without taking into account the distribution of all 
the other solutions.  
 
6.2.2. Variation of the SA solutions for different seeds for random number extraction 
As a further illustrative example, the SA solver is taken, all its parameters are set up to given values, 
and only the initial seed for random number extraction is changed. In these conditions, the solutions 
generally change in different executions, especially when the solver is run on a large-scale system. In 
order to show an example of parametric analysis conducted according with the principles indicated in 
this paper, four cooling rate values are considered, namely, a = {0.2, 0.5, 0.7, 0.95}, leaving all the 
other parameters constant and equal to the values used in Section 5.1.1. These values are intentionally 
very different, also going down to 0.5 and 0.2, well-known from the general theory of SA as poorly 
appropriate, since they may provide excessively fast decay of the control parameter in the external 

 
25 
cycle. The rationale of this choice is to test whether the proposed indicators correctly represent the 
appropriateness of the parameter setting. For each cooling rate, H = 120 solutions have been found, 
building the corresponding test CDFs. Fig. 10 shows the reference CDF and the test CDFs for the four 
cooling rate values, whereas Table 7 shows the corresponding performance indicators defined in the 
previous sections. The results confirm the suitability of the cooling rate 0.95, while, with the other 
cooling rates, the SA reaches the pseudo-optimal solution for a lower number of times and falls into 
worse solutions in most cases. As expected, OPISD ranks the CDFs from the one having the higher 
cooling rate to the one with the lower cooling rate.  
 
7. Concluding Remarks 
This paper has discussed a number of aspects to compare different solvers for heuristic optimization. 
A conceptual scheme has been drawn to represent the process used for claiming that a new “best solver” 
has been found. From this scheme, it may be seen that the mechanism of creation and testing of new 
heuristics cannot be formally stopped. However, the definition of comparison metrics more robust than 
simple but weak indicators (such as mean value, median, standard deviation, best value, worst value, as 
well as the PERC indicator shown in this paper) may help reducing the proposal of further solvers 
without a clear superior performance with respect to other solvers used for the same problem. 
Establishing a sound comparison requires the definition of a benchmark solver for each problem, whose 
outcomes may be expressed as the CDF composed of H solutions. On these bases, the comparisons with 
the results obtained by other solvers may be carried out by calculating the OPISD indicators 
corresponding to the benchmark solver and the proposed solvers, setting up the CDF of the solutions 
given by the top ranked solver as the (unchanged or new) benchmark. More generally, testing the 
solvers on multiple problems is important for a broader comparison among the solvers, with the aim of 
gaining some kind of confidence that the solvers could perform well on unseen problems. However, for 
the solvers applied to electrical energy system problems, it has to be considered that the same solver 
could be more suitable to be applied to a problem rather than another, for example because the 

 
26 
constraints can be modeled in an easier way for that problem, while for another problem the modeling 
of the constraints could be more complicate (and this complication does not occur for all the solvers).  
On the practical point of view, the proliferation of “new” best solvers could be limited by 
introducing both more robust indicators to compare the solvers, and suitable benchmarks validated by 
the power and energy system community. An example is the OPISDG indicator used to carry out a pre-
testing of a proposed heuristic on cases with known global optimum, to verify that 100% of the 
solutions are found (OPISDG = 1), before using that heuristic for further studies. The examples shown 
in this paper have confirmed that some solvers that exhibit good properties on large networks have no 
problem in finding the global optimum in 100% of the executions on networks for which the global 
optimum is known. In addition, the solvers to be compared have to be chosen in an effective way, to 
avoid comparisons among solvers developed in a detailed way and basic versions of other solvers 
implemented with limited effort to incorporate the characteristics and constraints of the problem. 
In summary, the concepts presented in this paper, supported by the application cases, suggest the 
following remarks: 
• In order to filter out the contributions based on poorly meaningful definitions of “better solution”, 
the papers that show comparisons only based on classical simple indicators do not provide effective 
advancements of the state of the art.  
• Robust testing of the results obtained by the solver has to be carried out by using effective indicators 
with statistical meaning, such as the ones based on the first order stochastic dominance presented in 
this paper. 
• For a problem with known global optimum, any solver (with its solution method and parameter 
settings) that generates the globally optimal solution in less than 100% of the executions should be 
considered inadequate to be used on the same problem for systems with larger size. Likewise, 
contributions presenting only the testing of a heuristic algorithm on a problem with known global 
optimum have an excessively limited scope and do not provide sufficient insights on the viability of 
application of the heuristic.  

 
27 
• For a problem with unknown global optimum, the ranking of the solutions by using OPISD may be 
useful to compare different solvers, or the same solver with different parameters, trying to create a 
solid benchmark. However, it has to be noted that, in heuristic methods depending on random 
extractions, even the change of the seed for random number extractions could generate different 
outcomes. As such, the results obtained on any benchmark that may be constructed cannot be 
considered as an absolute reference.  
• The proposed indicators may also be useful to detect improvements in the construction of a solver, to 
avoid another source of proliferation of publications that try and propose variants of the same solver 
(or hybridizations of different solvers) as the new “best” solvers just on the basis of the 
best/mean/median/standard deviation value obtained from some tests. 
 
 
 
References 
[1] 
E.D. Dolan, J.J. Moré, Benchmarking optimization software with performance profiles, 
Mathematical Programming 91 (2) (2002) 201–213. 
[2] 
J.J. Moré, S.M. Wild, Benchmarking derivative-free optimization algorithms, SIAM Journal 
Optim. 20 (1) (2009) 172–191. 
[3] 
M. Wineberg, Statistical analysis for evolutionary computation: an introduction, GECCO’12 
Companion, Philadelphia, PA, 7-11 July 2012.  
[4] 
G. Wu, R. Mallipeddi, P.N. Suganthan, Problem Definitions and Evaluation Criteria for the CEC 
2017 Competition and Special Session on Constrained Single Objective Real-Parameter 
Optimization, Technical Report, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, December 2016. 
Available at http://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/epnsugan/ [accessed 4 September 2018]. 
[5] 
F. Lezama, J. Soares, Z. Vale, J. Rueda, S. Rivera, I. Elrich, 2017 IEEE competition on modern 
heuristic optimizers for smart grid operation: Testbeds and results, Swarm and Evolutionary 
Computation (2018) in press. 

 
28 
[6] 
G. Chicco, A. Mazza, Assessment of optimal distribution network reconfiguration results using 
stochastic dominance concepts, Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks 9 (2017) 75–79.   
[7] 
X. Yao, Y. Liu, G. Lin, Evolutionary programming made faster, IEEE Trans. on Evolutionary 
Computation 3 (2) (1999) 82–102.  
[8] 
M. Lavorato, J.F. Franco, M.J. Rider, R. Romero, Imposing radiality constraints in distribution 
system optimization problems, IEEE Trans. on Power Systems 27 (1) (2012) 172–180.  
[9] 
H. Ahmadi, J.R. Martí, Mathematical representation of radiality constraint in distribution system 
reconfiguration problem, Electrical Power and Energy Systems 64 (2015) 293–299. 
[10] G. Chicco, A. Mazza, An Overview of the Probability-based Methods for Optimal Electrical 
Distribution System Reconfiguration, Proc. 4th International Symposium on Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering (ISEEE), Galati, Romania, 10-12 October 2013. 
[11] V. Miranda, N. Fonseca, EPSO - best-of-two-worlds meta-heuristic applied to power system 
problems, Proceedings of the 2002 Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC'02) 2 (2002) 
1080–1085. 
[12] K.Y. Lee, M.A. El-Sharkawi (eds.), Modern heuristic optimization techniques, Wiley, Hoboken, 
NJ, 2008. 
[13] W.T. Elsayed, Y.G. Hegazy, F.M. Bendary, M.S. El-Bages, A review on accuracy issues related 
to solving the non-convex economic dispatch problem, Electric Power Systems Research 141 
(2016) 325–332. 
[14] A.P. Alves da Silva, D.M. Falcão, K.Y. Lee, Overview of Applications in Power Systems, chapter 
12 in [12]. 
[15] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, A. Colorni, Positive Feedback as a Search Strategy, Politecnico di 
Milano: Dipartimento di Elettronica, 1991. 
[16] D. Karaboga, B. Basturk, A powerful and efficient algorithm for numerical function optimization: 
Artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm, Journal of Global Optimization 39 (2007) 459–471.  
[17] J.D. Farmer, N. Packard, A. Perelson, The immune system, adaptation and machine learning, 
Physica D 2, (1986) 187–204. 

 
29 
[18] K.M. Passino, Bio mimicry of bacterial foraging for distributed optimization and control, IEEE 
Contr. Syst. Mag. 22 (3) (2002) 57–67. 
[19] X.-S. Yang, J.R. Gonzalez, A new meta-heuristic bat inspired algorithm, in: Nature Inspired 
Cooperative Strategies for Optimization (NISCO 2010) Studies in Computational Intelligence, 
Springer, Berlin, Germany, 2010. 
[20] O.K. Erol, I. Eksin, A new optimization method: Big Bang – Big Crunch, Adv. Eng. Softw., 37 
(2) (2006) 106–111. 
[21] D. Simon, Biogeography-based optimization, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 12 
(6) (2008) 702–713. 
[22] A. Kaveh, S. Talatahari, A novel heuristic optimization method: charged system search, Acta 
Mech. 213 (3–4) (2010) 267–289. 
[23] X.S. Yang, S. Deb, Cuckoo search via Lévy flights. World Congress on Nature & Biologically 
Inspired Computing (NaBIC) (2009) 210–214.   
[24] R. Storn, K. Price, Differential evolution – a simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization 
over continuous spaces, J. Global Optim. 11 (4) (1997) 341–359. 
[25] L.J. Fogel, Autonomous automata, Industrial Research 4 (1962) 14–19. 
[26] I. Rechenberg, Evolutionsstrategie – Optimierung technischer Systeme nach Prinzipien der 
biologischen Evolution (in German), PhD thesis, Dr.-Ing. Thesis, Technical University of Berlin, 
Germany, 1971. 
[27] X.S. Yang, Firefly algorithms for multimodal optimization, Mathematics 5792 (2009) 169–178. 
[28] X.S. Yang, Flower pollination algorithm for global optimization. In J. Durand-Lose, N. Jonoska 
(Eds.), Unconventional computation and natural computation, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
7445, 240–249, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, 2012. 
[29] W.T. Pan, A new evolutionary computation approach: fruit fly optimization algorithm, Proc. 2011 
Conference of Digital Technology and Innovation Management, Taipei, 2011. Program code on 
the website <http://www.oitecshop.byethost16.com/FOA.html> 

 
30 
[30] J.H. Holland, Outline for a logical theory of adaptive systems, Journal of the Association for 
Computing Machinery 9 (3) (1962) 297–314. 
[31] S. Mirjalili, S.M. Mirjalili, A.  Lewis, Grey wolf optimizer, Advances in Engineering Software, 
69 (3) (2014) 46–61. 
[32] E. Rashedi, H. Nezamabadi-pour, S. Saryazdi, GSA: a gravitational search algorithm, Inf. Sci. 
179 (13) (2009) 2232–2248. 
[33] S. He, Q.H. Wu, J.R. Saunder, A novel group search optimizer inspired by animal behavior, in: 
Ecology, 2006 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2006. 
[34] Z.W. Geem, J-H. Kim, G.V. Loganathan, A new heuristic optimization algorithm: Harmony 
search, Simulation 76 (2001) 60–68.  
[35] E. Atashpaz-Gargari, C. Lucas, Imperialist Competitive Algorithm: An algorithm for optimization 
inspired by imperialistic competition, IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation 7 (2007) 
4661–4666. 
[36] A.R. Mehrabian, C. Lucas, A novel numerical optimization algorithm inspired from weed 
colonization, Ecol. Inf. 1 (2006) 355–366. 
[37] A.H. Gandomi, A.H. Alavi, Krill herd: a new bio-inspired optimization algorithm, Nonlinear Sci. 
Numer. Simul.17(12) (2012) 4831–4845. 
[38] P. Moscato, On evolution, search, optimization, genetic algorithms and martial arts: towards 
memetic algorithms, Caltech Concurrent Computation Program (report 826), 1989. 
[39] S.Mirjalili, Moth-flame optimization algorithm: a novel nature-inspired heuristic paradigm, 
Knowl.-Based Syst. 89 (2015) 228–249. 
[40] J. Kennedy, R.C. Eberhart, Particle Swarm Optimization, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Neural 
Networks, Perth, Australia, 4 (1995) 1942–1948. 
[41] S. Kirkpatrick, C.D. Gelatt Jr., M.P. Vecchi, Optimization by simulated annealing, Science 220 
(4598) (1983) 671–680. 
[42] F. Glover, Heuristics for Integer Programming Using Surrogate Constraints, Decision Sciences 8 
(1977) 156–166.  

 
31 
[43] C. Dai, W. Chen, Y. Zhu, X. Zhang, Seeker optimization algorithm for optimal reactive power 
dispatch, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 24 (3) (2009) 1218–1231. 
[44] M.M. Eusuff, K.E. Lansey, Optimization of water distribution network design using the shuffled 
frog leaping algorithm, J. Water Resour. Plann. Manage. 129 (3) (2003) 210–225.  
[45] J.J.Q. Yu, V.O.K. Li, A social spider algorithm for global optimization, Appl. Soft. Comput. 30 
(2015) 614–627. 
[46] M. Yuan Cheng, D. Prayogo, Symbiotic organisms search: a new metaheuristic optimization 
algorithm, Comput Struct 139 (2014) 98–112. 
[47] R.V. Rao, V.J. Savsani, D.P. Vakharia, Teaching–learning-based optimization: A novel method 
for constrained mechanical design optimization problems, Computer-Aided Design, 43 (3) (2011) 
303–315. 
[48] F. Glover, Tabu Search — Part I, ORSA Journal on Computing 1 (3) (1989) 190–206. 
[49] S. Mirjalili, S., A. Lewis, The whale optimization algorithm, Advances in Engineering Software 
95 (2016) 51–67.  
[50] K. Sörensen, Metaheuristics—the metaphor exposed, International Transactions in Operational 
Research 22 (1) (2015) 3–18. 
[51] E.G. Carrano, R.H.C. Takahashi, C.M. Fonseca, O.M. Neto, Nonlinear Network Optimization—
An Embedding Vector Space Approach, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 14 (2) 
(2010) 206–226.  
[52] J. Hadar, W.R. Russell, Stochastic dominance diversification, Journal of Economic Theory 3 
(1971) 288–305. 
[53] E.G. Carrano, E.F. Wanner, R.H.C. Takahashi, A Multicriteria Statistical Based Comparison 
Methodology for Evaluating Evolutionary Algorithms, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary 
Computation 15 (6) (2011) 848 – 870.  
[54] M. Carrión, U. Gotzes, R. Schultz, Risk aversion for an electricity retailer with second-order 
stochastic dominance constraints, Computational Management Science 6 (2009) 233–250. 

 
32 
[55] M. Zarif, M. Hossein Javidi, M. Sadegh Ghazizadeh, Self-Scheduling of Large Consumers With 
Second-Order Stochastic Dominance Constraints, IEEE Trans. on Power Systems 28 (1) (2013) 
289–299.  
[56] M.-P. Cheong, G.B. Sheblé, D. Berleant, C.-C. Teoh, J.-P. Argaud, M. Dancre, L. Andrieu, F. 
Barjon, Second Order Stochastic Dominance Portfolio Optimization for an Electric Energy 
Company, Proc. IEEE Lausanne Power Tech, 2007, 819–824. 
[57] M.T. Vespucci, M. Bertocchi, S. Zigrino, L.F. Escudero, Stochastic optimization models for 
power generation capacity expansion with risk management, Proc. 10th International Conference 
on the European Energy Market (EEM), 2013. 
[58] M. Shabanzadeh, M.-K. Sheikh-El-Eslami, M.-R. Haghifam, Risk-based medium-term trading 
strategy for a virtual power plant with first-order stochastic dominance constraints, IET Gener. 
Transm. Distrib. (2016), doi:10.1049/iet-gtd.2016.1072. 
[59] Y. Wu, V.K.N. Lau, D.H.K. Tsang, L.P. Qian, L. Meng, Optimal Energy Scheduling for 
Residential Smart Grid With Centralized Renewable Energy Source, IEEE Systems Journal 8 (2) 
(2014) 562–576.  
[60] G.R. Kirchhoff, Über die auflösung der gleichungen, auf welche man bei der untersuchung der 
linearen Verteilung galvanischer Ströme geführt wird (in German), Annals of Physical Chemistry 
72 (1847) 497–508. 
[61] A. Mazza, G. Chicco, H. Andrei, M. Rubino, Determination of the Relevant Periods for Intraday 
Distribution System Minimum Loss Reconfiguration, International Transactions on Electrical 
Energy Systems 25 (10) (2015) 1992–2023. 
[62] E. Carpaneto, G. Chicco, Distribution system minimum loss reconfiguration in the Hyper-Cube 
Ant Colony Optimization framework, Electric Power Systems Research 78 (12) (2008), 2037–
2045. 
[63] S. Kalambe, G. Agnihotri, Loss minimization techniques used in distribution network: 
bibliographical survey, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 29 (2014) 184–200. 

 
33 
[64] M.E. Baran, F.F. Wu, Network reconfiguration in distribution systems for loss reduction and load 
balancing, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery 4 (1989) 1401–1407. 
[65] E. Carpaneto, G. Chicco, E. Roggero, Comparing deterministic and simulated annealing-based 
algorithms for minimum losses reconfiguration of large distribution systems, Proc. IEEE 
PowerTech, Bologna, Italy, 23-26 June 2003, vol. 2, paper no. 137. 
[66] D.E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA (1989). 
[67] E.M. Carreno, R. Romero, A. Padilha-Feltrin, An Efficient Codification to Solve Distribution 
Network Reconfiguration for Loss Reduction Problem, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 23 
(2008) 1542–1551. 
[68] Y.-Y. Hong, S.-Y. Ho, Determination of network configuration considering multiobjective in 
distribution systems using genetic algorithms, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 20 (2005) 
1062–1069. 
[69] B. Enacheanu, B. Raison, R. Caire, O. Devaux, W. Bienia, N. HadjSaid, Radial Network 
Reconfiguration Using Genetic Algorithm Based on the Matroid Theory, IEEE Transactions on 
Power Systems 23 (2008) 186–195. 
[70] A. Mazza, G. Chicco, M. Rubino, Multi-objective distribution system optimization assisted by 
Analytic Hierarchy Process, Proc. IEEE International Energy Conference and Exhibition 
(ENERGYCON), Florence (2012) 393–400. 
[71] J. Kennedy, R. Eberhart, Swarm Intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann Publisher, San Francisco, CA 
(2001). 
[72] J. C. Bansal, P.K. Singh M. Saraswat, A. Verma, S.S. Jadon, A. Abraham, Inertia Weight 
Strategies in Particle Swarm Optimization, Third World Congress on Nature and Biologically 
Inspired Computing (NaBIC), Salamanca, Spain, 19-21 October 2011, 633–640.  
[73] G. Chen, X. Huang, J. Jia, Z. Min, Natural exponential Inertia Weight strategy in particle swarm 
optimization, The Sixth World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (WCICA 2006), 
Dalian, China, 21-23 June 2006, 1, 3672–3675.  

 
34 
[74] F. Batrinu, E. Carpaneto, G. Chicco, A novel Particle Swarm method for distribution system 
optimal reconfiguration, 2005 IEEE Russia Power Tech, St. Petersburg, 2005. 
[75] H.-D. Chiang, R. Jean-Jumeau, Optimal network reconfiguration in distribution systems, part 2. 
Solution algorithms and numerical results, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery 5 (1990) 1568–1574. 
[76] J.S. Savier, D. Das, Impact of network reconfiguration on loss allocation of radial distribution 
systems, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery 22 (2007) 2473–2480.  
 
 

 
35 
 
Tables 
 
 
Table 1.  
Number of articles from Science Direct (at 25 August 2018) that mention or apply a heuristic solver on a given 
problem. 
Heuristic name 
Problem  
DSR 
ED 
LF 
MS 
OPF 
PSP 
Ant colony optimization (ACO) [15] 
225 
458 
226 
129 
293 
91 
Artificial bee colony (ABC) [16] 
86 
336 
111 
24 
247 
55 
Artificial immune system (AIS) [17] 
38 
64 
44 
33 
84 
17 
Bacterial foraging (BF) [18] 
75 
210 
62 
9 
136 
24 
Bat algorithm (BA) [19] 
32 
71 
31 
8 
58 
10 
Big-bang big-crunch (BBBC) [20] 
32 
26 
9 
2 
25 
8 
Biogeography based optimization (BBO) [21] 
21 
171 
22 
13 
128 
31 
Charged system search (CSS) [22] 
3 
28 
6 
2 
17 
4 
Cuckoo search algorithm (CSA) [23] 
45 
140 
73 
16 
97 
21 
Differential evolution (DE) [24] 
122 
702 
217 
70 
456 
115 
Evolutionary algorithms (EA) [25] 
221 
838 
445 
171 
534 
157 
Evolution strategies (ES) [26] 
32 
136 
48 
31 
61 
19 
Firefly algorithm (FA) [27] 
48 
163 
96 
18 
109 
31 
Flower pollination algorithm (FPA) [28] 
8 
40 
13 
2 
31 
6 
Fruit fly optimization (FFO) [29] 
2 
22 
49 
4 
4 
3 
Genetic algorithms (GA) [30] 
611 
1629 
1092 
696 
1164 
407 
Grey wolf optimization (GWO) [31] 
10 
66 
14 
5 
49 
8 
Gravitational search algorithm (GSA) [32] 
42 
212 
78 
14 
191 
37 
Group search optimization (GSO) [33] 
15 
96 
16 
4 
59 
7 
Harmony search algorithm (HSA) [34] 
106 
340 
82 
31 
237 
50 
Imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA) [35] 
7 
29 
4 
2 
18 
5 
Invasive weed optimization (IWO) [36] 
7 
38 
4 
3 
33 
6 
Krill herd algorithm (KHA) [37] 
10 
42 
14 
3 
49 
3 
Memetic algorithms (MA) [38] 
22 
78 
32 
25 
27 
11 
Moth-flame optimization (MFO) [39] 
0 
13 
4 
0 
9 
2 
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) [40] 
346 
1281 
706 
208 
895 
259 
Simulated annealing (SA) [41] 
255 
650 
333 
263 
410 
149 
Scatter search (SS) [42] 
5 
24 
4 
12 
10 
5 
Seeker optimization algorithm (SOA) [43] 
7 
48 
11 
2 
33 
11 
Shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) [44] 
50 
91 
26 
11 
102 
31 
Social spider algorithm (SSA) [45] 
2 
12 
4 
0 
6 
0 
Symbiotic organisms search algorithm (SOS) [46] 
5 
13 
5 
1 
13 
2 
Teaching-learning-based optimization (TLBO) [47] 
44 
167 
31 
9 
158 
30 
Tabu search (TS) [48]* 
198 
398 
139 
184 
284 
91 
Whale optimization algorithm (WOA) [49] 
2 
9 
5 
2 
16 
2 
*The TS has been inserted as a matter of comparison, even if it is not a probability-based method 
 
 
Table 2 
Test Network Data 
rated voltage [kV] 
12.66 
number of nodes N 
70 
number of branches B  
74 
number of supply points S 
1 
number of open branches L 
5 
number of radial configurations Y 
407,924 
 
 
 
 

 
36 
Table 3 
Parameters Used for Computing the Set of Solutions 
solver 
parameter 
range of values 
step 
SA 
a 
0.900÷0.999 
0.001 
GA 
CGA 
pc 
100÷190 
0.35÷0.44 
10 
0.1 
PSO 
CPSO 
winit 
100÷190 
0.81÷0.90 
10 
0.01 
 
 
Table 4 
Performance Indicators Calculated for the Test System  
network 
solver 
𝑃𝐸𝑅𝐶P
(;) 
𝐴@,P
(;) 
𝑂𝑃𝐼𝑆𝐷P
(;) 
70 nodes 
SA 
100% 
0 
1 
PSO 
100% 
0 
1 
GA 
94% 
0.0180 
0.9823 
 
 
Table 5 
Real Network Data 
rated voltage [kV] 
10.5 
number of nodes N 
207 
number of branches B  
213 
number of supply points S 
1 
number of open branches L 
7 
number of radial configurations Y 1.516·105 
 
 
Table 6 
Performance Indicators Calculated for the Real Network  
network 
solver 
𝑃𝐸𝑅𝐶P
(;) 
𝐴@,P
(;) 
𝑂𝑃𝐼𝑆𝐷P
(;) 
207 nodes 
SA 
59% 
0.0165 
0.9837 
PSO 
20% 
0.0464 
0.9556 
GA 
0% 
1.9533 
0.3386 
 
 
Table 7 
Performance Indicators Calculated with the SA Method (Real Network) 
network 
cooling rate a 
𝑃𝐸𝑅𝐶P
(;) 
𝐴@,P
(;) 
𝑂𝑃𝐼𝑆𝐷P
(;) 
207 nodes 
0.2 
57% 
0.0024 
0.9976 
0.5 
53% 
0.0019 
0.9981 
0.9 
69% 
0.0011 
0.9989 
 
 
 

 
37 
Figures 
 
 
Fig. 1. Comparing optimization solvers on the basis of their solutions – A perpetual motion conceptual scheme. 
 
 
Fig. 2. Deterministic dominance. For the objective function minimization, the solutions from solver A dominate the solutions 
from solver B on a deterministic way.  
 
 
a) Solutions obtained                        b) CDF 
Fig. 3. Construction of the CDF. 
 
best!solver/solution!found!so!far!!
testing!
new!solver!
set!the!new!solver!as!the!
new!best!!!report!results!
more!
testing!?!
yes!
no!
yes!
no!
better!
solution!?!
objective!
function!
solutions!from!
solver!B!
solutions!from!
solver!A!!
0
10
20
30
40
50
1.38
1.39
1.4
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
execution
objective function (p.u.)
1.38
1.4
1.42
1.44
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
objective function (p.u.)
CDF

 
38 
 
a) First-order (point-to-point)      b) Second-order (example of CDFs) 
 
 
c) Positive areas ∫
D𝐹E
(;)(𝑧) −𝐹H
(;)(𝑧)I
J
K8L
 satisfying the second-order stochastic dominance conditions  
Fig. 4. Stochastic dominance. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Reference CDF for Case G. 
 
Fig. 6. Reference CDF for Case R. 
 
 
Fig. 7. Representation of the areas contributing to the OPISD definition. 
 
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
objective function (p.u.)
CDF
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
objective function (p.u.)
CDF
FA
FA
B
(H)
F (H)
(H)
B
F (H)
1
1.05
1.1
1.15
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
objective function     (p.u.) 
area
y
1
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
1.07
1.08
1.09
1.1
0
0.5
1
objective function (p.u.)
reference CDF
global 
optimum
1.38
1.39
1.4
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
0
0.5
1
objective function (p.u.)
CDF
F (H)F (H)
reference
CDF
B
A
FC
(H)
1.385
1.39
1.395
1.4
1.405
1.41
0
0.5
1
objective function (p.u.)
CDF
test CDF
reference CDF

 
39 
 
Fig. 8. Reference CDF and test CDFs for the methods run on the 70-node test system.  
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Reference CDF and test CDFs for the three methods (207-node network). The internal zoom refers to SA and PSO 
close to the lowest objective function values. 
 
 
Fig. 10. Reference CDF and test CDFs for the three methods (207-node network, SA with different cooling rate a and 120 
executions for each cooling rate with different initial seed for random number extraction). 
 
 
8
10
12
14
16
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
objective function (pu)
CDF
 
 
PSO
SA
GA
reference CDF
0.072
0.074
0.076
0.078
objective function (pu)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
CDF
PSO
SA
GA
reference CDF
0.072
0.073
0.074
0.075
objective function (pu)
0
0.5
1
CDF
 = 0.2
 = 0.5
 = 0.9
reference CDF

 
40 
Highlights  
• 
The search of the best solver for heuristic methods is not a well-posed problem. 
• 
A scheme that explains the unlimited introduction of “best solvers” is shown.  
• 
Two first-order stochastic dominance-based metrics are proposed. 
• 
These metrics allow more significant comparison among optimization solutions.  
• 
Using these metrics can reduce the uncontrolled proliferation of new “best solvers”.  
